    Chapter 1 Marseilles--The Arrival

    ON THE 24th of February, 1810, the look-out at Notre-Dame de la Garde signalled the three-master, the Pharaon from Smyrna, Trieste, and Naples. As usual, a pilot put off immediately, and rounding the Chateau d'If, got on board the vessel between Cape Morgion and Rion island.
Immediately, and according to custom, the ramparts of Fort Saint-Jean were covered with spectators; it is always an event at Marseilles for a ship to come into port, especially when this ship, like the Pharaon, has been built, rigged, and laden at the old Phocée docks, and belongs to an owner of the city.
The ship drew on and had safely passed the strait, which some volcanic shock has made between the Calasareigne and Jaros islands; had doubled Pomègue, and approached the harbor under topsails, jib, and spanker, but so slowly and sedately that the idlers, with that instinct which is the forerunner of evil, asked one another what misfortune could have happened on board. However, those experienced in navigation saw plainly that if any accident had occurred, it was not to the vessel herself, for she bore down with all the evidence of being skilfully handled, the anchor a-cockbill, the jib-boom guys already eased off, and standing by the side of the pilot, who was steering the Pharaon towards the narrow entrance of the inner port, was a young man, who, with activity and vigilant eye, watched every motion of the ship, and repeated each direction of the pilot.
The vague disquietude which prevailed among the spectators had so much affected one of the crowd that he did not await the arrival of the vessel in harbor, but jumping into a small skiff, desired to be pulled alongside the Pharaon, which he reached as she rounded into La Rèserve basin.
When the young man on board saw this person approach, he left his station by the pilot, and, hat in hand, leaned over the ship's bulwarks.
He was a fine, tall, slim young fellow of eighteen or twenty, with black eyes, and hair as dark as a raven's wing; and his whole appearance bespoke that calmness and resolution peculiar to men accustomed from their cradle to contend with danger.
"Ah, is it you, Dantès?" cried the man in the skiff. "What's the matter? and why have you such an air of sadness aboard?"
"A great misfortune, M. Morrel," replied the young man,--"a great misfortune, for me especially! Off Civita Vecchia we lost our brave Captain Leclere."
"And the cargo?" inquired the owner, eagerly.
"Is all safe, M. Morrel; and I think you will be satisfied on that head. But poor Captain Leclere--"
"What happened to him?" asked the owner, with an air of considerable resignation. "What happened to the worthy captain?"
"He died."
"Fell into the sea?"
"No, sir, he died of brain-fever in dreadful agony." Then turning to the crew, he said, "Bear a hand there, to take in sail!"
All hands obeyed, and at once the eight or ten seamen who composed the crew, sprang to their respective stations at the spanker brails and outhaul, topsail sheets and halyards, the jib downhaul, and the topsail clewlines and buntlines. The young sailor gave a look to see that his orders were promptly and accurately obeyed, and then turned again to the owner.
"And how did this misfortune occur?" inquired the latter, resuming the interrupted conversation.
"Alas, sir, in the most unexpected manner. After a long talk with the harbor-master, Captain Leclere left Naples greatly disturbed in mind. In twenty-four hours he was attacked by a fever, and died three days afterwards. We performed the usual burial service, and he is at his rest, sewn up in his hammock with a thirty-six pound shot at his head and his heels, off El Giglio island. We bring to his widow his sword and cross of honor. It was worth while, truly," added the young man with a melancholy smile, "to make war against the English for ten years, and to die in his bed at last, like everybody else."
"Why, you see, Edmond," replied the owner, who appeared more comforted at every moment, "we are all mortal, and the old must make way for the young. If not, why, there would be no promotion; and since you assure me that the cargo--"
"Is all safe and sound, M. Morrel, take my word for it; and I advise you not to take 25,000 francs for the profits of the voyage."
Then, as they were just passing the Round Tower, the young man shouted: "Stand by there to lower the topsails and jib; brail up the spanker!"
The order was executed as promptly as it would have been on board a man-of-war.
"Let go--and clue up!" At this last command all the sails were lowered, and the vessel moved almost imperceptibly onwards.
"Now, if you will come on board, M. Morrel," said Dantès, observing the owner's impatience, "here is your supercargo, M. Danglars, coming out of his cabin, who will furnish you with every particular. As for me, I must look after the anchoring, and dress the ship in mourning."
The owner did not wait for a second invitation. He seized a rope which Dantès flung to him, and with an activity that would have done credit to a sailor, climbed up the side of the ship, while the young man, going to his task, left the conversation to Danglars, who now came towards the owner. He was a man of twenty-five or twenty-six years of age, of unprepossessing countenance, obsequious to his superiors, insolent to his subordinates; and this, in addition to his position as responsible agent on board, which is always obnoxious to the sailors, made him as much disliked by the crew as Edmond Dantès was beloved by them.
"Well, M. Morrel," said Danglars, "you have heard of the misfortune that has befallen us?"
"Yes--yes: poor Captain Leclere! He was a brave and an honest man."
"And a first-rate seaman, one who had seen long and honorable service, as became a man charged with the interests of a house so important as that of Morrel & Son," replied Danglars.
"But," replied the owner, glancing after Dantès, who was watching the anchoring of his vessel, "it seems to me that a sailor needs not be so old as you say, Danglars, to understand his business, for our friend Edmond seems to understand it thoroughly, and not to require instruction from any one."
"Yes," said Danglars, darting at Edmond a look gleaming with hate. "Yes, he is young, and youth is invariably self-confident. Scarcely was the captain's breath out of his body when he assumed the command without consulting any one, and he caused us to lose a day and a half at the Island of Elba, instead of making for Marseilles direct."
"As to taking command of the vessel," replied Morrel, "that was his duty as captain's mate; as to losing a day and a half off the Island of Elba, he was wrong, unless the vessel needed repairs."
"The vessel was in as good condition as I am, and as, I hope you are, M. Morrel, and this day and a half was lost from pure whim, for the pleasure of going ashore, and nothing else."
"Dantès," said the shipowner, turning towards the young man, "come this way!"
"In a moment, sir," answered Dantès, "and I'm with you." Then calling to the crew, he said--"Let go!"
The anchor was instantly dropped, and the chain ran rattling through the port-hole. Dantès continued at his post in spite of the presence of the pilot, until this manoeuvre was completed, and then he added, "Half-mast the colors, and square the yards!"
"You see," said Danglars, "he fancies himself captain already, upon my word."
"And so, in fact, he is," said the owner.
"Except your signature and your partner's, M. Morrel."
"And why should he not have this?" asked the owner; "he is young, it is true, but he seems to me a thorough seaman, and of full experience."
A cloud passed over Danglars' brow. "Your pardon, M. Morrel," said Dantès, approaching, "the vessel now rides at anchor, and I am at your service. You hailed me, I think?"
Danglars retreated a step or two.
"I wished to inquire why you stopped at the Island of Elba?"
"I do not know, sir; it was to fulfil the last instructions of Captain Leclere, who, when dying, gave me a packet for Marshal Bertrand."
"Then did you see him, Edmond?"
"Who?"
"The marshal."
"Yes."
Morrel looked around him, and then, drawing Dantès on one side, he said suddenly--"And how is the emperor?"
"Very well, as far as I could judge from the sight of him."
"You saw the emperor, then?"
"He entered the marshal's apartment while I was there."
"And you spoke to him?"
"Why, it was he who spoke to me, sir," said Dantès, with a smile.
"And what did he say to you?"
"Asked me questions about the vessel, the time she left Marseilles, the course she had taken, and what was her cargo. I believe, if she had not been laden, and I had been her master, he would have bought her. But I told him I was only mate, and that she belonged to the firm of Morrel & Son. 'Ah, yes,' he said, 'I know them. The Morrels have been shipowners from father to son; and there was a Morrel who served in the same regiment with me when I was in garrison at Valence.'"
"Pardieu! and that is true!" cried the owner, greatly delighted. "And that was Policar Morrel, my uncle, who was afterwards a captain. Dantès, you must tell my uncle that the emperor remembered him, and you will see it will bring tears into the old soldier's eyes. Come, come," continued he, patting Edmond's shoulder kindly, "you did very right, Dantès, to follow Captain Leclere's instructions, and touch at Elba, although if it were known that you had conveyed a packet to the marshal, and had conversed with the emperor, it might bring you into trouble."
"How could that bring me into trouble, sir?" asked Dantès; "for I did not even know of what I was the bearer; and the emperor merely made such inquiries as he would of the first comer. But, pardon me, here are the health officers and the customs inspectors coming alongside." And the young man went to the gangway. As he departed, Danglars approached, and said,--
"Well, it appears that he has given you satisfactory reasons for his landing at Porto-Ferrajo?"
"Yes, most satisfactory, my dear Danglars."
"Well, so much the better," said the supercargo; "for it is not pleasant to think that a comrade has not done his duty."
"Dantès has done his," replied the owner, "and that is not saying much. It was Captain Leclere who gave orders for this delay."
"Talking of Captain Leclere, has not Dantès given you a letter from him?"
"To me?--no--was there one?"
"I believe that, besides the packet, Captain Leclere confided a letter to his care."
"Of what packet are you speaking, Danglars?"
"Why, that which Dantès left at Porto-Ferrajo."
"How do you know he had a packet to leave at Porto-Ferrajo?"
Danglars turned very red.
"I was passing close to the door of the captain's cabin, which was half open, and I saw him give the packet and letter to Dantès."
"He did not speak to me of it," replied the shipowner; "but if there be any letter he will give it to me."
Danglars reflected for a moment. "Then, M. Morrel, I beg of you," said he, "not to say a word to Dantès on the subject. I may have been mistaken."
At this moment the young man returned; Danglars withdrew.
"Well, my dear Dantès, are you now free?" inquired the owner.
"Yes, sir."
"You have not been long detained."
"No. I gave the custom-house officers a copy of our bill of lading; and as to the other papers, they sent a man off with the pilot, to whom I gave them."
"Then you have nothing more to do here?"
"No--everything is all right now."
"Then you can come and dine with me?"
"I really must ask you to excuse me, M. Morrel. My first visit is due to my father, though I am not the less grateful for the honor you have done me."
"Right, Dantès, quite right. I always knew you were a good son."
"And," inquired Dantès, with some hesitation, "do you know how my father is?"
"Well, I believe, my dear Edmond, though I have not seen him lately."
"Yes, he likes to keep himself shut up in his little room."
"That proves, at least, that he has wanted for nothing during your absence."
Dantès smiled. "My father is proud, sir, and if he had not a meal left, I doubt if he would have asked anything from anyone, except from Heaven."
"Well, then, after this first visit has been made we shall count on you."
"I must again excuse myself, M. Morrel, for after this first visit has been paid I have another which I am most anxious to pay." "True, Dantès, I forgot that there was at the Catalans some one who expects you no less impatiently than your father--the lovely Mercédès."
Dantès blushed.
"Ah, ha," said the shipowner, "I am not in the least surprised, for she has been to me three times, inquiring if there were any news of the Pharaon. Peste! Edmond, you have a very handsome mistress!"
"She is not my mistress," replied the young sailor, gravely; "she is my betrothed."
"Sometimes one and the same thing," said Morrel, with a smile.
"Not with us, sir," replied Dantès.
"Well, well, my dear Edmond," continued the owner, "don't let me detain you. You have managed my affairs so well that I ought to allow you all the time you require for your own. Do you want any money?"
"No, sir; I have all my pay to take--nearly three months' wages."
"You are a careful fellow, Edmond."
"Say I have a poor father, sir."
"Yes, yes, I know how good a son you are, so now hasten away to see your father. I have a son too, and I should be very wroth with those who detained him from me after a three months' voyage."
"Then I have your leave, sir?"
"Yes, if you have nothing more to say to me."
"Nothing."
"Captain Leclere did not, before he died, give you a letter for me?"
"He was unable to write, sir. But that reminds me that I must ask your leave of absence for some days."
"To get married?"
"Yes, first, and then to go to Paris."
"Very good; have what time you require, Dantès. It will take quite six weeks to unload the cargo, and we cannot get you ready for sea until three months after that; only be back again in three months, for the Pharaon," added the owner, patting the young sailor on the back, "cannot sail without her captain."
"Without her captain!" cried Dantès, his eyes sparkling with animation; "pray mind what you say, for you are touching on the most secret wishes of my heart. Is it really your intention to make me captain of the Pharaon?"
"If I were sole owner we'd shake hands on it now, my dear Dantès, and call it settled; but I have a partner, and you know the Italian proverb--Chi ha compagno ha padrone--'He who has a partner has a master.' But the thing is at least half done, as you have one out of two votes. Rely on me to procure you the other; I will do my best."
"Ah, M. Morrel," exclaimed the young seaman, with tears in his eyes, and grasping the owner's hand, "M. Morrel, I thank you in the name of my father and of Mercédès."
"That's all right, Edmond. There's a providence that watches over the deserving. Go to your father: go and see Mercédès, and afterwards come to me."
"Shall I row you ashore?"
"No, thank you; I shall remain and look over the accounts with Danglars. Have you been satisfied with him this voyage?"
"That is according to the sense you attach to the question, sir. Do you mean is he a good comrade? No, for I think he never liked me since the day when I was silly enough, after a little quarrel we had, to propose to him to stop for ten minutes at the island of Monte Cristo to settle the dispute--a proposition which I was wrong to suggest, and he quite right to refuse. If you mean as responsible agent when you ask me the question, I believe there is nothing to say against him, and that you will be content with the way in which he has performed his duty."
"But tell me, Dantès, if you had command of the Pharaon should you be glad to see Danglars remain?"
"Captain or mate, M. Morrel, I shall always have the greatest respect for those who possess the owners' confidence."
"That's right, that's right, Dantès! I see you are a thoroughly good fellow, and will detain you no longer. Go, for I see how impatient you are."
"Then I have leave?"
"Go, I tell you."
"May I have the use of your skiff?"
"Certainly."
"Then, for the present, M. Morrel, farewell, and a thousand thanks!"
"I hope soon to see you again, my dear Edmond. Good luck to you."
The young sailor jumped into the skiff, and sat down in the stern sheets, with the order that he be put ashore at La Canebière. The two oarsmen bent to their work, and the little boat glided away as rapidly as possible in the midst of the thousand vessels which choke up the narrow way which leads between the two rows of ships from the mouth of the harbor to the Quai d'Orleans.
The shipowner, smiling, followed him with his eyes until he saw him spring out on the quay and disappear in the midst of the throng, which from five o'clock in the morning until nine o'clock at night, swarms in the famous street of La Canebière,--a street of which the modern Phocaeans are so proud that they say with all the gravity in the world, and with that accent which gives so much character to what is said, "If Paris had La Canebière, Paris would be a second Marseilles." On turning round the owner saw Danglars behind him, apparently awaiting orders, but in reality also watching the young sailor,--but there was a great difference in the expression of the two men who thus followed the movements of Edmond Dantès.
一八一五年二月二十四日，在避风堰了望塔上的了望员向人们发出了信号，告之三桅帆船法老号到了。它是从士麦拿出发经过的里雅斯特和那不勒斯来的。立刻一位领港员被派出去，绕过伊夫堡，在摩琴海岬和里翁岛之间登上了船。
圣·琪安海岛的平台上即刻挤满了看热闹的人。在马赛，一艘大船的进港终究是一件大事，尤其是象法老号这样的大船，船主是本地人，船又是在佛喜造船厂里建造装配的，因而就特别引人注目。
法老号渐渐驶近了，它已顺利通过了卡拉沙林岛和杰罗斯岛之间由几次火山爆发所造成的海峡，绕过波米琪岛，驶近了港口。尽管船上扯起了三张主桅帆，一张大三角帆和一张后桅帆，但它驶得非常缓慢，一副无精打采的样子，以致岸上那些看热闹的人本能地预感到有什么不幸的事发生了，于是互相探问船上究竟发生了什么不幸的事。不过那些航海行家们一眼就看出，假如的确发生了什么意外事情的话，那一定与船的本身无关。因为从各方面来看，它并无丝毫失去操纵的迹象。领港员正在驾驶着动作敏捷的法老号通过马赛港狭窄的甬道进口。在领港员的旁边，有一青年正在动作敏捷地打着手势，他那敏锐的眼光注视着船的每一个动作，并重复领港员的每一个命令。
岸上看热闹的人中弥漫着一种焦躁不安的情绪。其中有一位忍耐不住了，他等不及帆船入港就跳进了一只小艇迎着大船驶去，那只小艇在大船到里瑟夫湾对面的地方时便靠拢了法老号。
大船上的那个青年看见了来人，就摘下帽子，从领港员身旁离开并来到了船边。他是一个身材瘦长的青年，年龄约莫有十九岁左右的样子，有着一双黑色的眼睛和一头乌黑的头发；他的外表给人一种极其镇定和坚毅的感觉，那种镇定和坚毅的气质是只有从小就经过大风大浪，艰难险阻的人才具有的。
“啊！是你呀，唐太斯？”小艇的人喊道。“出了什么事？为什么你们船上显得这样丧气？”
“太不幸了，莫雷尔先生！”那个青年回答说，“太不幸了，尤其是对我！在契维塔韦基亚附近，我们失去了我们勇敢的莱克勒船长。”
“货呢？”船主焦急地问。
“货都安全，莫雷尔先生，那方面我想你是可以满意的。但可怜的莱克勒船长——”
“货物怎么样”？船主问道。
“货物未受任何损失，平安到达。不过，可怜的莱克勒船长他……”“他怎么了？出了什么事？”船主带着稍微放松一点的口气问。“那位可敬的船长怎么了？”
“他死了。”
“掉在海里了吗？”
“不，先生，他是得脑膜炎死的，临终时痛苦极了。”说完他便转身对船员喊到：“全体注意！准备抛锚！”
全体船员立刻按命令行动起来。船上一共有八个到十个海员，他们有的奔到大帆的索子那里，有的奔到三角帆和主帆的索子那里，有的则去控制转帆索和卷帆索。那青年水手四下环视了一下，看到他的命令已被迅速准确地执行，便又转过脸去对着船主。
“这件不幸的事是怎么发生的？”船主先等了一会儿便又重新拾起话题。
“唉，先生！完全是始料不到的事。在离开那不勒斯以前，莱克勒船长曾和那不勒斯港督交谈了很久。开船的时候，他就觉得头极不舒服。二十四个小时后，他就开始发烧，三天后就死了。我们按惯例海葬了他，想来他也可以安心长眠了。我们把他端端正正地缝裹在吊床里，头脚处放了两块各三十六磅重的铅块，就在艾尔及里奥岛外把他海葬了。我们把他的佩剑和十字荣誉勋章带了回来准备交给他的太太做纪念。船长这一生总算没虚度了。青年的脸上露出一个忧郁的微笑，又说，“他和英国人打仗打了十年，到头来仍能象常人那样死在床上。”
“爱德蒙，你知道，”船主说道，他显得越来越放心了，“我们都是凡人，都免不了一死，老年人终究要让位给青年人。不然，你看，青年人就无法得到升迁的机会，而且你已向我保证货物——”
“货物是完好无损的，莫雷尔先生，请相信我好了。我想这次航行你至少赚二万五千法郎呢。”
这时，船正在驶过圆塔，青年就喊道：“注意，准备收主帆，后帆和三角帆！”
他的命令立刻被执行了，犹如在一艘大战舰上一样。
“收帆！卷帆！”最后那个命令刚下达完，所有的帆就都收了下来，船在凭借惯性向前滑行，几乎觉不到是在向前移动了。
“现在请您上船来吧，莫雷尔先生，”唐太斯说，他看到船主已经有点着急便说道，“你的押运员腾格拉尔先生已走出船舱了，他会把详细情形告诉您的。我还得去照顾抛锚和给这只船挂丧的事。”
船主没再说什么便立即抓住了唐太斯抛给他的一条绳子，以水手般敏捷的动作爬上船边的弦梯，那青年去执行他的任务了，把船王和那个他称为腾格拉尔的人留在了一起。腾格拉尔现在正向船主走来。他约莫有二十五六岁，天生一副对上谄媚对下轻视无礼，不讨人喜欢的面孔。他在船上担任押运员，本来就惹水手们讨厌，他个人的一些作派也是惹人讨厌的一个因素，船员都憎恶他，却很爱戴爱德蒙·唐太斯。
“莫雷尔先生，”腾格拉尔说，“你听说我们所遭到的不幸了吧？”
“唉，是的！可怜的莱克勒船长！他的确是一个勇敢而又诚实的人！”
“而且也是一名一流的海员，是在大海与蓝天之间度过一生的——是负责莫雷尔父子公司这种重要的公司的最合适的人才。”腾格拉尔回答。
“可是，”船主一边说，一边把眼光盯在了正在指挥抛锚的唐太斯身上，“在我看来，腾格拉尔，一个水手要干得很内行，实在也不必象你所说的那样的老海员才行，因为你看，我们这位朋友爱德蒙，不需任何人的指示，似乎也干得很不错，完全可以称职了。”
“是的，”腾格拉尔向爱德蒙扫了一眼，露出仇恨的目光说，“是的，他很年轻，而年轻人总是自视甚高的，船长刚去世，他就跟谁也不商量一下，竟自作主张地独揽指挥权，对下面发号施令起来，而且还在厄尔巴岛耽搁了一天半，没有直航返回马赛。”
“说到他执掌这只船的指挥权，”莫雷尔说道，“他既然是船上大副，这就应该是他的职责。至于在厄尔巴岛耽搁了一天半的事儿，是他的错，除非这只船有什么故障。”
“这只船是象你我的身体一样，毫无毛病，莫雷尔先生，那一天半的时间完全是浪费——只是因为他要到岸上玩玩，别无他事。”
“唐太斯！”船主转过身去喊青年，“到这儿来！”
“等一下，先生，”唐太斯回答，“我就来。”然后他对船员喊道，“抛锚！”
锚立刻抛下去了，铁链哗啦啦一阵响声过去。虽有领港员在场，唐太斯仍然克尽职守，直到这项工作完成，才喊“降旗，把旗降在旗杆半中央。把公司的旗也降一半致哀，“看，”腾格拉尔说，“他简直已自命为船长啦。”
“嗯，事实上，他已经的确是了。”船主说。
“不错，就缺你和你的和伙人签字批准了，摩斯尔先生。”
“那倒不难。”船主说，“不错，他很年轻，但依我看，他似乎可以说已是一个经验丰富的海员了。”
腾格拉尔的眉际掠过一片阴云。
“对不起，莫雷尔先生，”唐太斯走过来说，“船现在已经停妥，我可以听的您吩咐了。刚才是您在叫我吗？”
腾格拉尔向后退了一两步。
“我想问问你为什么要在厄尔巴岛停泊耽搁了一天半时间。”
“究竟为什么我也不十分清楚，我只是在执行莱克勒船长最后的一个命令而已。他在临终的时候，要我送一包东西给贝特朗元帅。”
“你见到他了吗，爱德蒙？”
“谁？”
“元帅。”
“见到了。”
莫雷尔向四周张望了一下，把唐太斯拖到一边，急忙问道：“陛下他好吗？”
“看上去还不错。”
“这么说，你见到陛下了，是吗？”
“我在元帅房间里的时候，他进来了。”
“你和他讲了话吗？”
“是他先跟我讲话的，先生。”唐太斯微笑着说。
“他跟你都说了些什么？”
“问了我一些关于船的事——什么时候启航开回马赛，从哪儿来，船装了些什么货。我敢说，假如船上没有装货，而我又是船主的话，他会把船买下来的。但我告诉他，我只是大副，船是莫雷尔父子公司的。‘哦，哦！’他说，‘我了解他们！莫雷尔这个家族的人世世代代都当船主。当我驻守在瓦朗斯的时候，我那个团里面也有一个姓莫雷尔的人。”
“太对了！一点不错！”船主非常高兴地喊道。“那是我的叔叔波立卡·莫雷尔，他后来被提升到上尉。唐太斯，你一定要去告诉我叔叔，说陛下还记得他，你将看到那个老兵，被感动得掉眼泪的。好了，好了！”他慈爱地拍拍爱德蒙的肩膀继续说，“你做得很对，唐太斯，你是应该执行莱克勒船长的命令在厄尔巴岛靠一下岸的——但是如果你曾带一包东西给元帅，并还同陛下讲过话的事被人知道的话，那你就会受连累的。”
“我怎么会受连累呢？”唐太斯问。“我连带去的是什么东西根本都不知道，而陛下所问及的，又是一般的人所常问的那些普通问题。哦，对不起，海关关员和卫生部的检查员来了１”说完那青年人就向舷门那儿迎过去了。
他刚离开，腾格拉尔就凑了过来说道：
“哦，看来他已拿出充分的理由来向您解释他为什么在费拉约港靠岸的原因了，是吧？”
“是的，理由很充分，我亲爱的腾格拉尔。”
“哦，那就好，”押运员说，“看到一个同伴工作上不能尽责，心里总是很难受的。”
“唐太斯是尽了责的，”船主说道，“这件事不必多说了，这次耽搁是按莱克勒船长的吩咐做的。”
“说到莱克勒船长，唐太斯没有把一封他的信转给你吗？”
“给我的信？没有呀。有一封信吗？”
“我相信除了那包东西外，莱克勒船长还另有一封信托他转交的。”
“你说的是一包什么东西，腾格拉尔？”
“咦，就是唐太斯在费拉约港留下的那包东西呀。”
“你怎么知道他曾留了一包东西在费拉约港呢？”
经船主这样一问，腾格拉尔的脸顿时涨红了。“那天我经过船长室门口时，那门是半开着的，我便看见船长把那包东西和一封信交给了唐太斯。”
“他没有对我提到这件事，”船主说，“但是如果有信，他一定会交给我的。”
腾格拉尔想了一会儿。“这样的话，莫雷尔先生，请你，”他说，“有关这事，请你别再去问唐太斯了，或许是我弄错了。”
这时，那青年人回来了，腾格拉尔便乘机溜走了。
“喂，我亲爱的唐太斯，你现在没事了吗？”船主问。
“没事了，先生。”
“你回来的挺快呀。”
“是的。我拿了一份我们的进港证给了海关关员，其余的证件，我已交给了领港员，他们已派人和他同去了。”
“那么你在这儿的事都做完了是吗？”
唐太斯向四周看了一眼。
“没事了现在一切都安排妥了。”
“那么你愿意和我一起去共进晚餐吗？”
“请你原谅，莫雷尔先生。我得先去看看我父亲。但对你的盛情我还是非常感激的。”
“没错，唐太斯，真是这样，我早就知道你是一个好儿子。”
“嗯”唐太斯犹豫了一下问道：“你知道我父亲的近况吗？”
“我相信他很好，我亲爱的爱德蒙，不过最近我没见到他。”
“是啊，他老爱把自己关在他那个小屋里。”
“但那至少可以说明，当你不在的时候，他的日子还过得去。”
唐太斯微笑了一下。“我父亲是很要强的，很要面子，先生。即便是他饿肚子没饭吃了，恐怕除了上帝以外，他不会向任何人去乞讨的。”
“那么好吧，你先去看你的父亲吧，我们等着你。”
“我恐怕还得再请你原谅，莫雷尔先生，——因为我看过父亲以后，我还有另外一个地方要去一下。”
“真是的，唐太斯，我怎么给忘记了，在迦泰罗尼亚人那里，还有一个人也象你父亲一样在焦急地期待着你呢，——那可爱的美塞苔丝。”
唐太斯的脸红了。
“哈哈！”船主说，“难怪她到我这儿来了三次，打听法老号有什么消息没有呢。嘻嘻！爱德蒙，你的这位小情妇可真漂亮啊！”
“她不是我的情妇，”青年水手神色庄重严肃地说，“她是我的未婚妻。”
“有时两者是一回事。”莫雷尔微笑着说。
“我们俩可不是这样的，先生。”唐太斯回答。
“得了，得了，我亲爱的爱德蒙，”船主又说，“我不耽搁你了。我的事你办得很出色，我也应该让你有充分的时间去痛快地办一下自己的事了。你要钱用吗？”
“不，先生，我的报酬还都在这儿，——差不多有三个月的薪水呢。”
“你真是一个守规矩的小伙子，爱德蒙。”
“我还有一位可怜的父亲呢，先生。”
“不错，不错，我知道你是一个好儿子。那么去吧，去看你的父亲去吧。我自己也有个儿子，要是他航海三个月回来后，竟还有人阻扰他来看我，我会大大地发火的。”
“那么我可以走了吗，先生？”
“走吧，假如你再没有什么事要跟我说的话。”
“没有了。”
“莱克勒船长临终前，没有托你交一封信给我吗？”
“他当时已经根本不能动笔了，先生。不过，我倒想起了一件事，我还得向你请两星期的假。”
“是去结婚吗？”
“是的，先是去结婚，然后还得到巴黎去一次。”
“好，好。你就离开两个星期吧，唐太斯。反正船上卸货得花六个星期，卸完货以后，还得要过三个月以后才能再出海，你只要在三个月以内回来就行，——因为法老号，”船主拍拍青年水手的背，又说，“没有船长是不能出海的呀。”


“没有船长！”唐太斯眼睛里闪烁着兴奋的光芒，不禁说道，“你说什么呀，你好象窥视到了我心底最秘密的一线希望。你真要任命我做法老号的船长吗？”
“我亲爱的唐太斯，假如我是一人说了就算数的老板，我现在就可任命你，事情也就一言为定了，但你也知道，意大利有一句俗话——谁有了一个合伙人，谁就有了一个主人。但这事至少已成功一半了，因为在两张投票之中，你已经得到了一标。让我去把另外那一票也为你争取过来吧，我尽力办到。”
“啊，莫雷尔先生，”青年水手的眼睛里含着泪水，紧握住船主的手喊道——“莫雷尔先生，我代表我父亲和美塞苔丝谢谢你了。”
“好了，好了，爱德蒙，别提了，上天保佑好心人！快到你父亲那儿去吧，快去看看美塞苔丝吧，然后再到我这儿来。”
“我把您送上岸好吗？”
“不用了，谢谢你。我还得留下来和腾格拉尔核对一下帐目。你在这次航行里对他还满意吗？”
“那得看您这个问题是指哪一方面了，先生。假如您的意思是问，他是不是一个好伙计？那么我要说不是，因为自从那次我傻里傻气地和他吵了一次架以后，我曾向他提议在基督山岛上停留十分钟以消除不愉快，我想他从那以后开始讨厌我了——那次的事我本来就不该提那个建议，而他拒绝我也是很对的。假如你的问题是指他做押运员是否称职，那我就说他是无可挑剔的，对他的工作你会满意的。”
“但你要告诉我，唐太斯，假如由你来负责法老号，你愿意把腾格拉尔留在船上吗？”
“莫雷尔先生，”唐太斯回答道，“无论我做船长也好，做大副也好，凡是那些能获得我们船主信任的人，我对他们总是极尊重的。”
“好，好，唐太斯！我看你在各个方面都是好样的。别让我再耽误你了，快去吧，我看你已有些急不可耐啦。”
“那么我可以走了吗？”
“快走吧。我已经说过了。”
“我可以借用一下您的小艇吗？”
“当然可以。”
“那么，莫雷尔先生，再会吧。再一次多谢啦！”
“我希望不久能再看到你，我亲爱的爱德蒙。祝你好运！”
青年水手跳上了小艇，坐在船尾，吩咐朝卡纳比埃尔街划去。两个水手即刻划动起来，小船就飞快地在那从港口直到奥尔兰码头的千百只帆船中间穿梭过去。
船主微笑着目送着他，直到他上了岸，消失在卡纳比埃尔街上的人流里。这条街从清晨五点钟直到晚上九点钟都拥挤着川流不息的人群。卡纳比埃尔街是马赛最有名的街道，马赛的居民很以它为自豪，他们甚至煞有其事地庄重地宣称：“假如巴黎也有一条卡纳比埃尔街，那巴黎就可称为小马赛了。”
船主转过身来时，看见腾格拉尔正站在他背后。腾格拉尔表面上看似在等候他的吩咐，实际上却象他一样，在用目光遥送那青年水手。这两个人虽然都在注视着爱德蒙·唐太斯，但两个人目光里的神情和含义却大不相同。

    Chapter 2 Father and Son

    WE WILL LEAVE Danglars struggling with the demon of hatred, and endeavoring to insinuate in the ear of the shipowner some evil suspicions against his comrade, and follow Dantès, who, after having traversed La Canebière, took the Rue de Noailles, and entering a small house, on the left of the Allées de Meillan, rapidly ascended four flights of a dark staircase, holding the baluster with one hand, while with the other he repressed the beatings of his heart, and paused before a half-open door, from which he could see the whole of a small room. This room was occupied by Dantès' father. The news of the arrival of the Pharaon had not yet reached the old man, who, mounted on a chair, was amusing himself by training with trembling hand the nasturtiums and sprays of clematis that clambered over the trellis at his window. Suddenly, he felt an arm thrown around his body, and a well-known voice behind him exclaimed, "Father--dear father!"
The old man uttered a cry, and turned round; then, seeing his son, he fell into his arms, pale and trembling.
"What ails you, my dearest father? Are you ill?" inquired the young man, much alarmed.
"No, no, my dear Edmond--my boy--my son!--no; but I did not expect you; and joy, the surprise of seeing you so suddenly--Ah, I feel as if I were going to die."
"Come, come, cheer up, my dear father! 'Tis I--really I! They say joy never hurts, and so I came to you without any warning. Come now, do smile, instead of looking at me so solemnly. Here I am back again, and we are going to be happy."
"Yes, yes, my boy, so we will--so we will," replied the old man; "but how shall we be happy? Shall you never leave me again? Come, tell me all the good fortune that has befallen you."
"God forgive me," said the young man, "for rejoicing at happiness derived from the misery of others, but, Heaven knows, I did not seek this good fortune; it has happened, and I really cannot pretend to lament it. The good Captain Leclere is dead, father, and it is probable that, with the aid of M. Morrel, I shall have his place. Do you understand, father? Only imagine me a captain at twenty, with a hundred louis pay, and a share in the profits! Is this not more than a poor sailor like me could have hoped for?"
"Yes, my dear boy," replied the old man, "it is very fortunate."
"Well, then, with the first money I touch, I mean you to have a small house, with a garden in which to plant clematis, nasturtiums, and honeysuckle. But what ails you, father? Are you not well?"
"'Tis nothing, nothing; it will soon pass away"--and as he said so the old man's strength failed him, and he fell backwards.
"Come, come," said the young man, "a glass of wine, father, will revive you. Where do you keep your wine?"
"No, no; thanks. You need not look for it; I do not want it," said the old man.
"Yes, yes, father, tell me where it is," and he opened two or three cupboards.
"It is no use," said the old man, "there is no wine."
"What, no wine?" said Dantès, turning pale, and looking alternately at the hollow cheeks of the old man and the empty cupboards. "What, no wine? Have you wanted money, father?"
"I want nothing now that I have you," said the old man.
"Yet," stammered Dantès, wiping the perspiration from his brow,--"yet I gave you two hundred francs when I left, three months ago."
"Yes, yes, Edmond, that is true, but you forgot at that time a little debt to our neighbor, Caderousse. He reminded me of it, telling me if I did not pay for you, he would be paid by M. Morrel; and so, you see, lest he might do you an injury" --
"Well?"
"Why, I paid him."
"But," cried Dantès, "it was a hundred and forty francs I owed Caderousse."
"Yes," stammered the old man.
"And you paid him out of the two hundred francs I left you?"
The old man nodded.
"So that you have lived for three months on sixty francs," muttered Edmond.
"You know how little I require," said the old man.
"Heaven pardon me," cried Edmond, falling on his knees before his father.
"What are you doing?"
"You have wounded me to the heart."
"Never mind it, for I see you once more," said the old man; "and now it's all over--everything is all right again."
"Yes, here I am," said the young man, "with a promising future and a little money. Here, father, here!" he said, "take this--take it, and send for something immediately." And he emptied his pockets on the table, the contents consisting of a dozen gold pieces, five or six five-franc pieces, and some smaller coin. The countenance of old Dantès brightened.
"Whom does this belong to?" he inquired.
"To me, to you, to us! Take it; buy some provisions; be happy, and to-morrow we shall have more." "Gently, gently," said the old man, with a smile; "and by your leave I will use your purse moderately, for they would say, if they saw me buy too many things at a time, that I had been obliged to await your return, in order to be able to purchase them."
"Do as you please; but, first of all, pray have a servant, father. I will not have you left alone so long. I have some smuggled coffee and most capital tobacco, in a small chest in the hold, which you shall have to-morrow. But, hush, here comes somebody."
"'Tis Caderousse, who has heard of your arrival, and no doubt comes to congratulate you on your fortunate return."
"Ah, lips that say one thing, while the heart thinks another," murmured Edmond. "But, never mind, he is a neighbor who has done us a service on a time, so he's welcome."
As Edmond paused, the black and bearded head of Caderousse appeared at the door. He was a man of twenty-five or six, and held a piece of cloth, which, being a tailor, he was about to make into a coat-lining.
"What, is it you, Edmond, back again?" said he, with a broad Marseillaise accent, and a grin that displayed his ivory-white teeth.
"Yes, as you see, neighbor Caderousse; and ready to be agreeable to you in any and every way," replied Dantès, but ill-concealing his coldness under this cloak of civility.
"Thanks--thanks; but, fortunately, I do not want for anything; and it chances that at times there are others who have need of me." Dantès made a gesture. "I do not allude to you, my boy. No!--no! I lent you money, and you returned it; that's like good neighbors, and we are quits."
"We are never quits with those who oblige us," was Dantès' reply; "for when we do not owe them money, we owe them gratitude."
"What's the use of mentioning that? What is done is done. Let us talk of your happy return, my boy. I had gone on the quay to match a piece of mulberry cloth, when I met friend Danglars. 'You at Marseilles?'--'Yes,' says he.
"'I thought you were at Smyrna.'--'I was; but am now back again.'
"'And where is the dear boy, our little Edmond?'
"'Why, with his father, no doubt,' replied Danglars. And so I came," added Caderousse, "as fast as I could to have the pleasure of shaking hands with a friend."
"Worthy Caderousse!" said the old man, "he is so much attached to us."
"Yes, to be sure I am. I love and esteem you, because honest folks are so rare. But it seems you have come back rich, my boy," continued the tailor, looking askance at the handful of gold and silver which Dantès had thrown on the table.
The young man remarked the greedy glance which shone in the dark eyes of his neighbor. "Eh," he said, negligently. "this money is not mine. I was expressing to my father my fears that he had wanted many things in my absence, and to convince me he emptied his purse on the table. Come, father" added Dantès, "put this money back in your box--unless neighbor Caderousse wants anything, and in that case it is at his service."
"No, my boy, no," said Caderousse. "I am not in any want, thank God, my living is suited to my means. Keep your money--keep it, I say;--one never has too much;--but, at the same time, my boy, I am as much obliged by your offer as if I took advantage of it."
"It was offered with good will," said Dantès.
"No doubt, my boy; no doubt. Well, you stand well with M. Morrel I hear,--you insinuating dog, you!"
"M. Morrel has always been exceedingly kind to me," replied Dantès.
"Then you were wrong to refuse to dine with him." "What, did you refuse to dine with him?" said old Dantès; "and did he invite you to dine?"
"Yes, my dear father," replied Edmond, smiling at his father's astonishment at the excessive honor paid to his son.
"And why did you refuse, my son?" inquired the old man.
"That I might the sooner see you again, my dear father," replied the young man. "I was most anxious to see you."
"But it must have vexed M. Morrel, good, worthy man," said Caderousse. "And when you are looking forward to be captain, it was wrong to annoy the owner."
"But I explained to him the cause of my refusal," replied Dantès, "and I hope he fully understood it."
"Yes, but to be captain one must do a little flattery to one's patrons."
"I hope to be captain without that," said Dantès.
"So much the better--so much the better! Nothing will give greater pleasure to all your old friends; and I know one down there behind the Saint Nicolas citadel who will not be sorry to hear it."
"Mercédès?" said the old man.
"Yes, my dear father, and with your permission, now I have seen you, and know you are well and have all you require, I will ask your consent to go and pay a visit to the Catalans."
"Go, my dear boy," said old Dantès: "and heaven bless you in your wife, as it has blessed me in my son!"
"His wife!" said Caderousse; "why, how fast you go on, father Dantès; she is not his wife yet, as it seems to me."
"So, but according to all probability she soon will be," replied Edmond.
"Yes--yes," said Caderousse; "but you were right to return as soon as possible, my boy."
"And why?"
"Because Mercédès is a very fine girl, and fine girls never lack followers; she particularly has them by dozens."
"Really?" answered Edmond, with a smile which had in it traces of slight uneasiness.
"Ah, yes," continued Caderousse, "and capital offers, too; but you know, you will be captain, and who could refuse you then?"
"Meaning to say," replied Dantès, with a smile which but ill-concealed his trouble, "that if I were not a captain"--
"Eh--eh!" said Caderousse, shaking his head.
"Come, come," said the sailor, "I have a better opinion than you of women in general, and of Mercédès in particular; and I am certain that, captain or not, she will remain ever faithful to me."
"So much the better--so much the better," said Caderousse. "When one is going to be married, there is nothing like implicit confidence; but never mind that, my boy,--go and announce your arrival, and let her know all your hopes and prospects."
"I will go directly," was Edmond's reply; and, embracing his father, and nodding to Caderousse, he left the apartment.
Caderousse lingered for a moment, then taking leave of old Dantès, he went downstairs to rejoin Danglars, who awaited him at the corner of the Rue Senac.
"Well," said Danglars, "did you see him?"
"I have just left him," answered Caderousse.
"Did he allude to his hope of being captain?"
"He spoke of it as a thing already decided."
"Indeed!" said Danglars, "he is in too much hurry, it appears to me."
"Why, it seems M. Morrel has promised him the thing."
"So that he is quite elated about it?"
"Why, yes, he is actually insolent over the matter--has already offered me his patronage, as if he were a grand personage, and proffered me a loan of money, as though he were a banker."
"Which you refused?"
"Most assuredly; although I might easily have accepted it, for it was I who put into his hands the first silver he ever earned; but now M. Dantès has no longer any occasion for assistance--he is about to become a captain."
"Pooh!" said Danglars, "he is not one yet."
"Ma foi! it will be as well if he is not," answered Caderousse; "for if he should be, there will be really no speaking to him."
"If we choose," replied Danglars, "he will remain what he is; and perhaps become even less than he is."
"What do you mean?"
"Nothing--I was speaking to myself. And is he still in love with the Catalane?"
"Over head and ears; but, unless I am much mistaken, there will be a storm in that quarter."
"Explain yourself."
"Why should I?"
"It is more important than you think, perhaps. You do not like Dantès?"
"I never like upstarts."
"Then tell me all you know about the Catalane."
"I know nothing for certain; only I have seen things which induce me to believe, as I told you, that the future captain will find some annoyance in the vicinity of the Vieilles Infirmeries."
"What have you seen?--come, tell me!"
"Well, every time I have seen Mercédès come into the city she has been accompanied by a tall, strapping, black-eyed Catalan, with a red complexion, brown skin, and fierce air, whom she calls cousin."
"Really; and you think this cousin pays her attentions?"
"I only suppose so. What else can a strapping chap of twenty-one mean with a fine wench of seventeen?"
"And you say that Dantès has gone to the Catalans?"
"He went before I came down."
"Let us go the same way; we will stop at La Rèserve, and we can drink a glass of La Malgue, whilst we wait for news."
"Come along," said Caderousse; "but you pay the score."
"Of course," replied Danglars; and going quickly to the designated place, they called for a bottle of wine, and two glasses.
Père Pamphile had seen Dantès pass not ten minutes before; and assured that he was at the Catalans, they sat down under the budding foliage of the planes and sycamores, in the branches of which the birds were singing their welcome to one of the first days of spring.
第二章　父与子
 英文     我们暂且先放下不谈腾格拉尔如何怀着仇恨，竭力在船主莫雷尔的耳边讲他的同伴的坏话的。且说唐太斯横过了卡纳比埃尔街，顺着诺埃尹街转入梅兰巷，走进了靠左边的一家小房子里。他在黑暗的楼梯上一手扶着栏杆，一手按在他那狂跳的心上，急急地奔上了四层楼梯。他在一扇半开半掩的门前停了下来，那半开的门里是一个小房间。
唐太斯的父亲就住在这个房间里。法老号到港的消息老人还不知道。这时他正踩在一张椅子上，用颤抖的手指在窗口绑扎牵牛花和萎草花，想编成一个花棚。突然他觉得一只手臂拦腰抱住了他，随即一个熟悉的声音在耳边喊起来，“父亲！亲爱的父亲！”
老人惊叫了一声，转过身来，一看是自己的儿子，就颤巍巍地脸色惨白地倒在了他的怀抱中。
“你怎么啦，我最亲爱的父亲！你病了吗？”青年吃惊地问。
“不，不，我亲爱的爱德蒙——我的孩子——我的宝贝！不，我没想到你回来了。我真太高兴了，这样突然的看见你太让我激动了——天哪，我觉得我都快要死了。”
“高兴点，亲爱的父亲！是我——真的是我！人们都说高兴绝不会有伤身体的，所以我就偷偷的溜了进来。嗨！对我笑笑，不要拿这种疑惑的眼光看我呀。是我回来啦，我们现在要过快活的日子了。”
“孩子，我们要过快活的日子，——我们要过快活的日子，”老人说道。“但我们怎么才能快活呢？难道你会永远不再离开我了吗？来，快告诉我你交了什么好运了？”
“愿上帝宽恕我：我的幸福是建立在另一家人丧亲的痛苦上的，但上帝知道我并不是自己要这样的。事情既然已经发生了，我实在无法装出那种悲哀的样子。父亲，我们那位好心的船长莱克勒先生他死了，承蒙莫雷尔先生的推荐，我极有可能接替他的位置。你懂吗，父亲？想想看，我二十岁就能当上船长，薪水是一百金路易［法国金币名。］，还可以分红利！这可是象我这样的穷水手以前连想都不敢想的呀。”
“是的，我亲爱的孩子，”老人回答说，——“是的，这真是一桩大喜事的。”
“嗯，等我拿到第一笔钱时，我就为你买一所房子，要带花园的，你可以在里面种种牵牛花，萎草花和皂荚花什么的。你怎么了，父亲，你不舒服吗？”
“没什么，没什么，就会好的。”老人说着，终因年老体衰，力不从心，倒在了椅子里。
“来，来，”青年说，“喝点酒吧，父亲，你就会好的。你把酒放在哪儿了？”
“不，不用了，谢谢。你不用找了，我不喝。”老人说。
“喝，一定要喝父亲，告诉我酒在什么地方？”唐太斯一面说着，一面打开了两三个碗柜。
“你找不到的，”老人说，“没有酒了。”
“什么！没有酒了？”唐太斯说，他的脸色渐渐变白了，看着老人那深陷的双颊，又看看那空空的碗柜——“什么！没有酒了？父亲，你缺钱用吗？”
“我只要见到了你，就什么都不缺了。”老人说。
“可是，”唐太斯擦了一把额头上的冷汗，嗫嚅地说，——“可是三个月前我临走的时候给你留下过两百法郎呀。”
“是的，是的，爱德蒙，一点儿不错。但你当时忘了你还欠我们邻居卡德鲁斯一笔小债。他跟我提起了这件事，对我说，假如我不代你还债，他就会去找莫雷尔先生，去向他讨还，所以，为了免得你受影响……”
“那么？”
“哪，我就把钱还给他了。”
“可是，”唐太斯叫了起来，“我欠了卡德鲁斯一百四十法朗埃！”
“不错。”老人呐呐地说。
“那就是说你就从我留给你的两百法朗里抽出来还了他了？”
老人做了一个肯定的表示。
“这么说，三个月来你就只靠六十个法朗来维持生活！”青年自言自语地说。
“你知道我花销不大。”老人说。
“噢，上帝饶恕我吧！”爱德蒙哭着跪到了老人的面前。
“你这是怎么了？”
“你使我感到太伤心了！”
“这没什么，孩子。”老人说，“我一看到你，就什么都忘了，现在一切都好了。”
“是啊，我回来了，”青年说，“带着一个幸福远大的前程和一点钱回来了。看，父亲，看！”他说，“拿着吧——拿着，赶快叫人去买点东西。”说着他翻开口袋，把钱全倒在桌子上，一共有十几块金洋，五六块艾居［法国银币名。］和一些小零币。老唐太斯的脸上顿时展开了笑容。
“这些钱是谁的？”他问。
“是我的！你的！我们的！拿着吧，去买些吃的东西。快活些，明天我们还会有更多的。”
“小声点，轻点声，”老人微笑着说。”我还是把你的钱节省点用吧——因为大家要是看见我一次买了那么多的东西，就会说我非得等着你回来才能买得起那些东西。”
“随你便吧，但最重要的，父亲，该先雇一个佣人。我决不再让你独自一个人长期孤零零地生活了。我私下带了一些咖啡和上等烟草，现在都放在船上的小箱子里，明天早晨我就可以拿来给你了。嘘，别出声！有人来了。”
“是卡德鲁斯，他一定是听到了你回来的消息，知道你交了好运了，来向你道贺的。”
“哼！口是心非的家伙，”爱德蒙轻声说道。“不过，他毕竟是我们的邻居，而且还帮过我们的忙，所以我们还是应该表示欢迎的。”
爱德蒙的这句话刚轻声讲完，卡德鲁斯那个黑发蓬松的头便出现在门口。他看上去约莫二十五六岁，手里拿着一块布料，他原是一个裁缝，这块布料是他预备拿来做衣服的衬里用的。
“怎么！真是你回来了吗，爱德蒙？”他带着很重的马赛口音开口说道，露出满口白得如象牙一样的牙齿笑着。
“是的，我回来了，卡德鲁斯邻居，我正准备着想使你高兴一下呢。”唐太斯回答道，答话虽彬彬有礼，却仍掩饰不住他内心的冷淡。
“谢谢，谢谢，不过幸亏我还不需要什么。倒是有时人家需要我的帮忙呢。”唐太斯不觉动了一下。“我不是指你，我的孩子。不，不！我借钱给你，你还了我。好邻居之间这种事是常有的，我们已经两清了。”
“我们对那些帮助过我们的人是永远忘不了的。”唐太斯说，“因为我们虽还清了他们的钱，却还不清负他们的情的。”
“还提它干什么？过去的都过去了。让我们来谈谈你这次幸运的归来的事儿吧，孩子。我刚才到码头上去配一块细花布，碰到了我们的朋友腾格拉尔。‘怎么！你也在马赛呀！’我当时就喊了出来。他说：‘是呀。’‘我还以为你在士麦拿呢。’‘不错，我去过那儿，但现在又回来了。’‘我那亲爱的小家伙爱德蒙他在哪儿，’我问他。腾格拉尔就回答说：‘一定在他父亲那儿。’所以我就急忙跑来了，”卡德鲁斯接着说，“来高高兴兴地和老朋友握手。”
“好心的卡德鲁斯！”老人说，“他待我们多好啊！”
“是呀，我当然要这样的，我爱你们，并且敬重你们，天底下好人可不多啊！我的孩子，你好象是发了财回来啦。”裁缝一面说，一面斜眼看着唐太斯抛在桌子上的那一把金币和银币。
青年看出了从他邻居那黑眼睛里流露出的贪婪的目光。
他漫不经心地说，“这些钱不是我的，父亲看出我担心，他当我不在的时候缺钱用，为了让我放心，就把他钱包里的钱都倒在桌子上给我看。来吧，父亲。”唐太斯接着说，“快把这些钱收回到你的箱子里去吧，——除非我们的邻居卡德鲁斯要用，我们倒是乐意帮这个忙的。”
“不，孩子，不，”卡德鲁斯说，“我根本不需要，干我这行够吃的了。把你的钱收起来吧，——我说。一个人的钱不一定非得很多，我虽用不上你的钱，但对你的好意我还是很感激的。”
“我可是真心的呀。”唐太斯说。
“那当然，那当然。唔，我听说你和莫雷尔先生的关系不错，你这只得宠的小狗！”
“莫雷尔先生待我一直特别友善。”唐太斯回答。
“那么他请你吃饭你不该拒绝他呀。”
“什么！你竟然回绝他请你吃饭？”老唐太斯说。“他邀请过你吃饭吗？”
“是的，我亲爱的父亲。”爱德蒙回答。看到父亲因自己的儿子得到别人的器重而显出惊异的神情，便笑了笑。
“孩子呀，你为什么拒绝呢？”老人问。
“为了快点回来看你呀，我亲爱的父亲，”青年答道，“我太想你了。”
“但你这样做一定会使可敬的莫雷尔先生不高兴的，”卡德鲁斯说。“尤其是当你快要升为船长的时候，是不该在这时得罪船主的。”
“但我已把谢绝的理由向他解释过了，”唐太斯回答，“我想他会谅解的。”
“但是要想当船长，就该对船主恭敬一点才好。”
“我希望不恭顺也能当船长。”唐太斯说。
“那更好，——那更好！你这个消息会让那些老朋友听了都高兴的，我还知道圣·尼古拉堡那边有一个人，听到这个好消息也会高兴的。”
“你是说美塞苔丝吗？”老人说。
“是的，我亲爱的父亲，现在我已经见过了你，知道你很好，并不缺什么，我就放心了。请允许我到迦太罗尼亚人的村里，好吗？”
“去吧，我亲爱的孩子，”老唐太斯说，“望上帝保佑你的妻子，就如同保佑我的儿子一样！”
“他的妻子！”卡德鲁斯说，“你说得太早了点吧，唐太斯老爹。她还没正式成为他的妻子呢。”
“是这样的，但从各方面看，她肯定会成为我妻子的。”爱德蒙回答。
“不错，不错，”卡德鲁斯说，“但你这次回来得很快，做得是对的，我的孩子。”
“你这是什么意思？”
“因为美塞苔丝是一位非常漂亮的姑娘，而漂亮姑娘总是不乏有人追求的。尤其是她，身后有上打的追求者呢。”
“真的吗？”爱德蒙虽微笑着回答，但微笑里却流露出一点的不安。
“啊，是的，“卡德鲁斯又说，“而且都是些条件不错的人呢，但你知道，你就要做船长了，她怎么会拒绝你呢？”
“你是说，“唐太斯问道，他微笑着并没有掩饰住他的焦急，“假如我不是一个船长——”
“唉，唉。”卡德鲁斯说。
“得了，得了，”年轻的唐太斯说：“一般说来，对女人，我可比你了解的得多，尤其是美塞苔丝。我相信，不论我当不当船长，她都是忠诚于我的。”
“那再好也没有了，卡德鲁斯说。“一个人快要结婚的时候，信心十足总是好事。别管这些了，我的孩子，快去报到吧，并把你的希望告诉她。”
“我就去。”爱德蒙回答他，拥抱了一下他的父亲，挥挥手和卡德鲁斯告辞，就走出房间去了。
卡德鲁斯又呆了一会，便离开老唐太斯，下楼去见腾格拉尔，后者正在西纳克街的拐角上等他。
“怎么样，”腾格拉尔说，“你见到他了吗？”
“我刚从他那儿来。”
“他提到他希望做船长的事了吗？”
“他说的若有其事，那口气就好象事情已经决定了似的。”
“别忙！”腾格拉尔说，“依我看，他未免太心急了”。
“怎么，这件事莫雷尔先生好象已经答应他了啦。”
“这么说他已经在那儿自鸣得意了吗？”
“他简直骄傲得很，已经要来关照我了。好象他是个什么大人物似的，而且还要借钱给我，好象是一个银行家。”
“你拒绝了吗？”
“当然，虽然我即便是接受了也问心无愧，因为他第一次摸到发亮的银币，还是我放到他手里的。但现在唐太斯先生已不再要人帮忙了，他就要做船长了。”
“呸！”腾格拉尔说，“他现在还没有做成呢。”
“他还是做不成的好，”卡德鲁斯回答，“不然我们就别想再跟他说上话了。”
“假如我们愿意可以还让他爬上去，”腾格拉尔答道，“他爬不上去，或许不如现在呢。”
“你这话是什么意思？”
“没什么，我不过自己这么说着玩儿罢了。他还爱着那个漂亮的迦太尼亚小妞吗？”
“简直爱得发疯了，但除非是我弄错了，在这方面他可能要遇到点麻烦了。”
“你说清楚点。”
“我干吗要说清楚呢？”
“这件事或许比你想象得还要重要，你不喜欢唐太斯对吧？”
“我一向不喜欢目空一切的人。”
“那么关于迦太罗尼亚人的事，把你所知道的都告诉我吧。”
“我所知道的可都不怎么确切，只是就我亲眼见的来说，我猜想那位未来的船长会在老医务所路附近。”
“你知道些什么事，告诉我！”
“是这样的，我每次看见美塞苔丝进城时，总有一个身材魁梧高大的迦太罗尼亚小伙子陪着她，那个人有一对黑色的眼睛，肤色褐中透红，很神气很威武，她叫他表哥。”
“真的！那么你认为这位表兄在追求她吗？”
“我只是这么想。一个身材魁梧的二十几岁的小伙子，对一个漂亮的十七岁的少女还能有什么别的想法呢？”
“你说唐太斯已到迦太罗尼亚人那儿去了吗”？
“我没有下楼他就去了。”
“那我们就到这条路上去吧，我们可以在瑞瑟夫酒家那儿等着，一面喝拉玛尔格酒，一面听听消息。”
“谁向我们通消息呢？”
“我们在半路上等着他呀，看一下他的神色怎么样，就知道了。”
“走吧，”卡德鲁斯说，“但话说在前面，你来付酒钱。”
“那当然，”腾格拉尔说道。他们快步走向约定的地点，要了瓶酒。
邦非尔老爹看见唐太斯在十分钟以前刚刚过去。他们既确知了他还在迦太罗尼亚人的村里。便在长着嫩叶的梧桐树下和大枫树底下坐下来。头上的树枝间，小鸟们正在动人地合唱着，歌唱春天的好时光。

    Chapter 3 The Catalans

    BEYOND A BARE, weather-worn wall, about a hundred paces from the spot where the two friends sat looking and listening as they drank their wine, was the village of the Catalans. Long ago this mysterious colony quitted Spain, and settled on the tongue of land on which it is to this day. Whence it came no one knew, and it spoke an unknown tongue. One of its chiefs, who understood Proven?al, begged the commune of Marseilles to give them this bare and barren promontory, where, like the sailors of old, they had run their boats ashore. The request was granted; and three months afterwards, around the twelve or fifteen small vessels which had brought these gypsies of the sea, a small village sprang up. This village, constructed in a singular and picturesque manner, half Moorish, half Spanish, still remains, and is inhabited by descendants of the first comers, who speak the language of their fathers. For three or four centuries they have remained upon this small promontory, on which they had settled like a flight of seabirds, without mixing with the Marseillaise population, intermarrying, and preserving their original customs and the costume of their mother-country as they have preserved its language. Our readers will follow us along the only street of this little village, and enter with us one of the houses, which is sunburned to the beautiful dead-leaf color peculiar to the buildings of the country, and within coated with whitewash, like a Spanish posada. A young and beautiful girl, with hair as black as jet, her eyes as velvety as the gazelle's, was leaning with her back against the wainscot, rubbing in her slender delicately moulded fingers a bunch of heath blossoms, the flowers of which she was picking off and strewing on the floor; her arms, bare to the elbow, brown, and modelled after those of the Arlesian Venus, moved with a kind of restless impatience, and she tapped the earth with her arched and supple foot, so as to display the pure and full shape of her well-turned leg, in its red cotton, gray and blue clocked, stocking. At three paces from her, seated in a chair which he balanced on two legs, leaning his elbow on an old worm-eaten table, was a tall young man of twenty, or two-and-twenty, who was looking at her with an air in which vexation and uneasiness were mingled. He questioned her with his eyes, but the firm and steady gaze of the young girl controlled his look.
"You see, Mercédès," said the young man, "here is Easter come round again; tell me, is this the moment for a wedding?"
"I have answered you a hundred times, Fernand, and really you must be very stupid to ask me again."
"Well, repeat it,--repeat it, I beg of you, that I may at last believe it! Tell me for the hundredth time that you refuse my love, which had your mother's sanction. Make me understand once for all that you are trifling with my happiness, that my life or death are nothing to you. Ah, to have dreamed for ten years of being your husband, Mercédès, and to lose that hope, which was the only stay of my existence!"
"At least it was not I who ever encouraged you in that hope, Fernand," replied Mercédès; "you cannot reproach me with the slightest coquetry. I have always said to you, 'I love you as a brother; but do not ask from me more than sisterly affection, for my heart is another's.' Is not this true, Fernand?"
"Yes, that is very true, Mercédès," replied the young man, "Yes, you have been cruelly frank with me; but do you forget that it is among the Catalans a sacred law to intermarry?"
"You mistake, Fernand; it is not a law, but merely a custom, and, I pray of you, do not cite this custom in your favor. You are included in the conscription, Fernand, and are only at liberty on sufferance, liable at any moment to be called upon to take up arms. Once a soldier, what would you do with me, a poor orphan, forlorn, without fortune, with nothing but a half-ruined hut and a few ragged nets, the miserable inheritance left by my father to my mother, and by my mother to me? She has been dead a year, and you know, Fernand, I have subsisted almost entirely on public charity. Sometimes you pretend I am useful to you, and that is an excuse to share with me the produce of your fishing, and I accept it, Fernand, because you are the son of my father's brother, because we were brought up together, and still more because it would give you so much pain if I refuse. But I feel very deeply that this fish which I go and sell, and with the produce of which I buy the flax I spin,--I feel very keenly, Fernand, that this is charity."
"And if it were, Mercédès, poor and lone as you are, you suit me as well as the daughter of the first shipowner or the richest banker of Marseilles! What do such as we desire but a good wife and careful housekeeper, and where can I look for these better than in you?"
"Fernand," answered Mercédès, shaking her head, "a woman becomes a bad manager, and who shall say she will remain an honest woman, when she loves another man better than her husband? Rest content with my friendship, for I say once more that is all I can promise, and I will promise no more than I can bestow."
"I understand," replied Fernand, "you can endure your own wretchedness patiently, but you are afraid to share mine. Well, Mercédès, beloved by you, I would tempt fortune; you would bring me good luck, and I should become rich. I could extend my occupation as a fisherman, might get a place as clerk in a warehouse, and become in time a dealer myself."
"You could do no such thing, Fernand; you are a soldier, and if you remain at the Catalans it is because there is no war; so remain a fisherman, and contented with my friendship, as I cannot give you more."
"Well, I will do better, Mercédès. I will be a sailor; instead of the costume of our fathers, which you despise, I will wear a varnished hat, a striped shirt, and a blue jacket, with an anchor on the buttons. Would not that dress please you?"
"What do you mean?" asked Mercédès, with an angry glance,--"what do you mean? I do not understand you?"
"I mean, Mercédès, that you are thus harsh and cruel with me, because you are expecting some one who is thus attired; but perhaps he whom you await is inconstant, or if he is not, the sea is so to him."
"Fernand," cried Mercédès, "I believed you were good-hearted, and I was mistaken! Fernand, you are wicked to call to your aid jealousy and the anger of God! Yes, I will not deny it, I do await, and I do love him of whom you speak; and, if he does not return, instead of accusing him of the inconstancy which you insinuate, I will tell you that he died loving me and me only." The young girl made a gesture of rage. "I understand you, Fernand; you would be revenged on him because I do not love you; you would cross your Catalan knife with his dirk. What end would that answer? To lose you my friendship if he were conquered, and see that friendship changed into hate if you were victor. Believe me, to seek a quarrel with a man is a bad method of pleasing the woman who loves that man. No, Fernand, you will not thus give way to evil thoughts. Unable to have me for your wife, you will content yourself with having me for your friend and sister; and besides," she added, her eyes troubled and moistened with tears, "wait, wait, Fernand; you said just now that the sea was treacherous, and he has been gone four months, and during these four months there have been some terrible storms."
Fernand made no reply, nor did he attempt to check the tears which flowed down the cheeks of Mercédès, although for each of these tears he would have shed his heart's blood; but these tears flowed for another. He arose, paced a while up and down the hut, and then, suddenly stopping before Mercédès, with his eyes glowing and his hands clinched,--"Say, Mercédès," he said, "once for all, is this your final determination?"
"I love Edmond Dantès," the young girl calmly replied, "and none but Edmond shall ever be my husband."
"And you will always love him?"
"As long as I live."
Fernand let fall his head like a defeated man, heaved a sigh that was like a groan, and then suddenly looking her full in the face, with clinched teeth and expanded nostrils, said,--"But if he is dead"--
"If he is dead, I shall die too."
"If he has forgotten you"--
"Mercédès!" called a joyous voice from without,--"Mercédès!"
"Ah," exclaimed the young girl, blushing with delight, and fairly leaping in excess of love, "you see he has not forgotten me, for here he is!" And rushing towards the door, she opened it, saying, "Here, Edmond, here I am!"
Fernand, pale and trembling, drew back, like a traveller at the sight of a serpent, and fell into a chair beside him. Edmond and Mercédès were clasped in each other's arms. The burning Marseilles sun, which shot into the room through the open door, covered them with a flood of light. At first they saw nothing around them. Their intense happiness isolated them from all the rest of the world, and they only spoke in broken words, which are the tokens of a joy so extreme that they seem rather the expression of sorrow. Suddenly Edmond saw the gloomy, pale, and threatening countenance of Fernand, as it was defined in the shadow. By a movement for which he could scarcely account to himself, the young Catalan placed his hand on the knife at his belt.
"Ah, your pardon," said Dantès, frowning in his turn; "I did not perceive that there were three of us." Then, turning to Mercédès, he inquired, "Who is this gentleman?"
"One who will be your best friend, Dantès, for he is my friend, my cousin, my brother; it is Fernand--the man whom, after you, Edmond, I love the best in the world. Do you not remember him?"
"Yes!" said Dantès, and without relinquishing Mercédès hand clasped in one of his own, he extended the other to the Catalan with a cordial air. But Fernand, instead of responding to this amiable gesture, remained mute and trembling. Edmond then cast his eyes scrutinizingly at the agitated and embarrassed Mercédès, and then again on the gloomy and menacing Fernand. This look told him all, and his anger waxed hot.
"I did not know, when I came with such haste to you, that I was to meet an enemy here."
"An enemy!" cried Mercédès, with an angry look at her cousin. "An enemy in my house, do you say, Edmond! If I believed that, I would place my arm under yours and go with you to Marseilles, leaving the house to return to it no more."
Fernand's eye darted lightning. "And should any misfortune occur to you, dear Edmond," she continued with the same calmness which proved to Fernand that the young girl had read the very innermost depths of his sinister thought, "if misfortune should occur to you, I would ascend the highest point of the Cape de Morgion and cast myself headlong from it."
Fernand became deadly pale. "But you are deceived, Edmond," she continued. "You have no enemy here--there is no one but Fernand, my brother, who will grasp your hand as a devoted friend."
And at these words the young girl fixed her imperious look on the Catalan, who, as if fascinated by it, came slowly towards Edmond, and offered him his hand. His hatred, like a powerless though furious wave, was broken against the strong ascendancy which Mercédès exercised over him. Scarcely, however, had he touched Edmond's hand than he felt he had done all he could do, and rushed hastily out of the house.
"Oh," he exclaimed, running furiously and tearing his hair--"Oh, who will deliver me from this man? Wretched--wretched that I am!"
"Hallo, Catalan! Hallo, Fernand! where are you running to?" exclaimed a voice.
The young man stopped suddenly, looked around him, and perceived Caderousse sitting at table with Danglars, under an arbor.
"Well", said Caderousse, "why don't you come? Are you really in such a hurry that you have no time to pass the time of day with your friends?"
"Particularly when they have still a full bottle before them," added Danglars. Fernand looked at them both with a stupefied air, but did not say a word.
"He seems besotted," said Danglars, pushing Caderousse with his knee. "Are we mistaken, and is Dantès triumphant in spite of all we have believed?"
"Why, we must inquire into that," was Caderousse's reply; and turning towards the young man, said, "Well, Catalan, can't you make up your mind?"
Fernand wiped away the perspiration steaming from his brow, and slowly entered the arbor, whose shade seemed to restore somewhat of calmness to his senses, and whose coolness somewhat of refreshment to his exhausted body.
"Good-day," said he. "You called me, didn't you?" And he fell, rather than sat down, on one of the seats which surrounded the table.
"I called you because you were running like a madman, and I was afraid you would throw yourself into the sea," said Caderousse, laughing. "Why, when a man has friends, they are not only to offer him a glass of wine, but, moreover, to prevent his swallowing three or four pints of water unnecessarily!"
Fernand gave a groan, which resembled a sob, and dropped his head into his hands, his elbows leaning on the table.
"Well, Fernand, I must say," said Caderousse, beginning the conversation, with that brutality of the common people in which curiosity destroys all diplomacy, "you look uncommonly like a rejected lover;" and he burst into a hoarse laugh.
"Bah!" said Danglars, "a lad of his make was not born to be unhappy in love. You are laughing at him, Caderousse."
"No," he replied, "only hark how he sighs! Come, come, Fernand," said Caderousse, "hold up your head, and answer us. It's not polite not to reply to friends who ask news of your health."
"My health is well enough," said Fernand, clinching his hands without raising his head.
"Ah, you see, Danglars," said Caderousse, winking at his friend, "this is how it is; Fernand, whom you see here, is a good and brave Catalan, one of the best fishermen in Marseilles, and he is in love with a very fine girl, named Mercédès; but it appears, unfortunately, that the fine girl is in love with the mate of the Pharaon; and as the Pharaon arrived to-day--why, you understand!"
"No; I do not understand," said Danglars.
"Poor Fernand has been dismissed," continued Caderousse.
"Well, and what then?" said Fernand, lifting up his head, and looking at Caderousse like a man who looks for some one on whom to vent his anger; "Mercédès is not accountable to any person, is she? Is she not free to love whomsoever she will?"
"Oh, if you take it in that sense," said Caderousse, "it is another thing. But I thought you were a Catalan, and they told me the Catalans were not men to allow themselves to be supplanted by a rival. It was even told me that Fernand, especially, was terrible in his vengeance."
Fernand smiled piteously. "A lover is never terrible," he said.
"Poor fellow!" remarked Danglars, affecting to pity the young man from the bottom of his heart. "Why, you see, he did not expect to see Dantès return so suddenly--he thought he was dead, perhaps; or perchance faithless! These things always come on us more severely when they come suddenly."
"Ah, ma foi, under any circumstances," said Caderousse, who drank as he spoke, and on whom the fumes of the wine began to take effect,--"under any circumstances Fernand is not the only person put out by the fortunate arrival of Dantès; is he, Danglars?"
"No, you are right--and I should say that would bring him ill-luck."
"Well, never mind," answered Caderousse, pouring out a glass of wine for Fernand, and filling his own for the eighth or ninth time, while Danglars had merely sipped his. "Never mind--in the meantime he marries Mercédès--the lovely Mercédès--at least he returns to do that."
During this time Danglars fixed his piercing glance on the young man, on whose heart Caderousse's words fell like molten lead.
"And when is the wedding to be?" he asked.
"Oh, it is not yet fixed!" murmured Fernand.
"No, but it will be," said Caderousse, "as surely as Dantès will be captain of the Pharaon--eh, Danglars?"
Danglars shuddered at this unexpected attack, and turned to Caderousse, whose countenance he scrutinized, to try and detect whether the blow was premeditated; but he read nothing but envy in a countenance already rendered brutal and stupid by drunkenness.
"Well," said he, filling the glasses, "let us drink to Captain Edmond Dantès, husband of the beautiful Catalane!"
Caderousse raised his glass to his mouth with unsteady hand, and swallowed the contents at a gulp. Fernand dashed his on the ground.
"Eh, eh, eh!" stammered Caderousse. "What do I see down there by the wall, in the direction of the Catalans? Look, Fernand, your eyes are better than mine. I believe I see double. You know wine is a deceiver; but I should say it was two lovers walking side by side, and hand in hand. Heaven forgive me, they do not know that we can see them, and they are actually embracing!"
Danglars did not lose one pang that Fernand endured.
"Do you know them, Fernand?" he said.
"Yes," was the reply, in a low voice. "It is Edmond and Mercédès!"
"Ah, see there, now!" said Caderousse; "and I did not recognize them! Hallo, Dantès! hello, lovely damsel! Come this way, and let us know when the wedding is to be, for Fernand here is so obstinate he will not tell us."
"Hold your tongue, will you?" said Danglars, pretending to restrain Caderousse, who, with the tenacity of drunkards, leaned out of the arbor. "Try to stand upright, and let the lovers make love without interruption. See, look at Fernand, and follow his example; he is well-behaved!"
Fernand, probably excited beyond bearing, pricked by Danglars, as the bull is by the bandilleros, was about to rush out; for he had risen from his seat, and seemed to be collecting himself to dash headlong upon his rival, when Mercédès, smiling and graceful, lifted up her lovely head, and looked at them with her clear and bright eyes. At this Fernand recollected her threat of dying if Edmond died, and dropped again heavily on his seat. Danglars looked at the two men, one after the other, the one brutalized by liquor, the other overwhelmed with love.
"I shall get nothing from these fools," he muttered; "and I am very much afraid of being here between a drunkard and a coward. Here's an envious fellow making himself boozy on wine when he ought to be nursing his wrath, and here is a fool who sees the woman he loves stolen from under his nose and takes on like a big baby. Yet this Catalan has eyes that glisten like those of the vengeful Spaniards, Sicilians, and Calabrians, and the other has fists big enough to crush an ox at one blow. Unquestionably, Edmond's star is in the ascendant, and he will marry the splendid girl--he will be captain, too, and laugh at us all, unless"--a sinister smile passed over Danglars' lips--"unless I take a hand in the affair," he added.
"Hallo!" continued Caderousse, half-rising, and with his fist on the table, "hallo, Edmond! do you not see your friends, or are you too proud to speak to them?"
"No, my dear fellow!" replied Dantès, "I am not proud, but I am happy, and happiness blinds, I think, more than pride."
"Ah, very well, that's an explanation!" said Caderousse. "How do you do, Madame Dantès?"
Mercédès courtesied gravely, and said--"That is not my name, and in my country it bodes ill fortune, they say, to call a young girl by the name of her betrothed before he becomes her husband. So call me Mercédès, if you please."
"We must excuse our worthy neighbor, Caderousse," said Dantès, "he is so easily mistaken."
"So, then, the wedding is to take place immediately, M. Dantès," said Danglars, bowing to the young couple.
"As soon as possible, M. Danglars; to-day all preliminaries will be arranged at my father's, and to-morrow, or next day at latest, the wedding festival here at La Rèserve. My friends will be there, I hope; that is to say, you are invited, M. Danglars, and you, Caderousse."
"And Fernand," said Caderousse with a chuckle; "Fernand, too, is invited!"
"My wife's brother is my brother," said Edmond; "and we, Mercédès and I, should be very sorry if he were absent at such a time."
Fernand opened his mouth to reply, but his voice died on his lips, and he could not utter a word.
"To-day the preliminaries, to-morrow or next day the ceremony! You are in a hurry, captain!"
"Danglars," said Edmond, smiling, "I will say to you as Mercédès said just now to Caderousse, 'Do not give me a title which does not belong to me'; that may bring me bad luck."
"Your pardon," replied Danglars, "I merely said you seemed in a hurry, and we have lots of time; the Pharaon cannot be under weigh again in less than three months."
"We are always in a hurry to be happy, M. Danglars; for when we have suffered a long time, we have great difficulty in believing in good fortune. But it is not selfishness alone that makes me thus in haste; I must go to Paris."
"Ah, really?--to Paris! and will it be the first time you have ever been there, Dantès?"
"Yes."
"Have you business there?"
"Not of my own; the last commission of poor Captain Leclere; you know to what I allude, Danglars--it is sacred. Besides, I shall only take the time to go and return."
"Yes, yes, I understand," said Danglars, and then in a low tone, he added, "To Paris, no doubt to deliver the letter which the grand marshal gave him. Ah, this letter gives me an idea--a capital idea! Ah; Dantès, my friend, you are not yet registered number one on board the good ship Pharaon;" then turning towards Edmond, who was walking away, "A pleasant journey," he cried.
"Thank you," said Edmond with a friendly nod, and the two lovers continued on their way, as calm and joyous as if they were the very elect of heaven.
