    Chapter 1 Engaged
    No one is staring at you,I promised myself. No one is staring at you. No one is staring at you.　　But, because I couldn't lie convincingly even to myself, I had to check.　　As I sat waiting for one of the three traffic lights in town to turn green, I peeked to the right—in herminivan, Mrs. Weber had turned her whole torso in my direction. Her eyes bored into mine, and Iflinched back, wondering why she didn't drop her gaze or look ashamed. It was still considered rude tostare at people, wasn't it? Didn't that apply to me anymore?　　Then I remembered that these windows were so darkly tinted that she probably had no idea if it waseven me in here, let alone that I'd caught her looking. I tried to take some comfort in the fact that shewasn't really staring at me, just the car.　　Mycar. Sigh.　　I glanced to the left and groaned. Two pedestrians were frozen on the sidewalk, missing their chance tocross as they stared. Behind them, Mr. Marshall was gawking through the plate-glass window of his littlesouvenir shop. At least he didn't have his nose pressed up against the glass. Yet.　　The light turned green and, in my hurry to escape, I stomped on the gas pedal without thinking—thenormal way I would have punched it to get my ancient Chevy truck moving.　　Engine snarling like a hunting panther, the car jolted forward so fast that my body slammed into the blackleather seat and my stomach flattened against my spine.　　"Arg!" I gasped as I fumbled for the brake. Keeping my head, I merely tapped the pedal. The carlurched to an absolute standstill anyway.　　I couldn't bear to look around at the reaction. If there had been any doubt as to who was driving this carbefore, it was gone now. With the toe of my shoe, I gently nudged the gas pedal down one halfmillimeter, and the car shotforward again.　　I managed to reach my goal, the gas station. If I hadn't been running on vapors, I wouldn't have comeinto town at all. I was going without a lot of things these days, like Pop-Tarts and shoelaces, to avoidspending time in public.　　Moving as if I were in a race, I got the hatch open, the cap off, the card scanned, and the nozzle in thetank within seconds. Of course, there was nothing I could do to make the numbers on the gauge pick upthe pace. They ticked by sluggishly, almost as if they were doing it just to annoy me.　　It wasn't bright out—a typical drizzly day in Forks, Washington—but I still felt like a spotlight wastrained on me, drawing attention to the delicate ring on my left hand. At times like this, sensing the eyeson my back, it felt as if the ring were pulsing like a neon sign: Look at me, look at me.　　It was stupid to be so self-conscious, and I knew that. Besides my dad and mom, did it really matterwhat people were saying about my engagement? About my new car? About my mysterious acceptanceinto an Ivy League college? About the shiny black credit card that felt red-hot in my back pocket rightnow?　　"Yeah, who cares what they think," I muttered under my breath.　　"Urn, miss?" a man's voice called.　　I turned, and then wished I hadn't.　　Two men stood beside a fancy SUV with brand-new kayaks tied to the top. Neither of them waslooking at me; they both were staring at the car.　　Personally, I didn't get it. But then, I was just proud I could distinguish between the symbols for Toyota,Ford, and Chevy. This car was glossy black, sleek, and pretty, but it was still just a car to me.　　"I'm sorry to bother you, but could you tell me what kind of car you're driving?" the tall one asked.　　"Urn, a Mercedes, right?""Yes," the man said politely while his shorter friend rolled his eyes at my answer. "I know. But I waswondering, is that... are you driving a Mercedes Guardian?" The man said the name with reverence. Ihad a feeling this guy would get along well with Edward Cullen, my... my fiance (there really was nogetting around that truth with the wedding just days away). "They aren't supposed to be available inEurope yet," the man went on, "let alone here."While his eyes traced the contours of my car—it didn't look much different from any other Mercedessedan to me, but what did I know?—I briefly contemplated my issues with words like fiance, wedding,husband, etc.　　I just couldn't put it together in my head.　　On the one hand, I had been raised to cringe at the very thought of poofy white dresses and bouquets.　　But more than that, I just couldn't reconcile a staid, respectable, dull concept like husband with myconcept of Edward. It was like casting an archangel as an accountant; I couldn't visualize him in anycommonplace role.　　Like always, as soon as I started thinking about Edward I was caught up in a dizzy spin of fantasies. Thestranger had to clear his throat to get my attention; he was still waiting for an answer about the car's makeand model.　　"I don't know," I told him honestly.　　"Do you mind if I take a picture with it?"It took me a second to process that. "Really? You want to take a picture with the car?""Sure—nobody is going to believe me if I don't get proof.""Urn. Okay. Fine."I swiftly put away the nozzle and crept into the front seat to hide while the enthusiast dug a hugeprofessional-looking camera out of his backpack. He and his friend took turns posing by the hood, andthen they went to take pictures at the back end.　　"I miss my truck," I whimpered to myself.　　Very, very convenient—too convenient—that my truck would wheeze its last wheeze just weeks afterEdward and I had agreed to our lopsided compromise, one detail of which was that he be allowed toreplace my truck when it passed on. Edward swore it was only to be expected; my truck had lived along, full life and then expired of natural causes. According to him. And, of course, I had no way to verifyhis story or to try to raise my truck from the dead on my own. My favorite mechanic—I stopped that thought cold, refusing to let it come to a conclusion. Instead, I listened to the men's voicesoutside, muted by the car walls.　　"... went at it with a flamethrower in the online video. Didn't even pucker the paint.""Of course not. You could roll a tank over this baby. Not much of a market for one over here. Designedfor Middle East diplomats, arms dealers, and drug lords mostly.""Think she's something?" the short one asked in a softer voice. I ducked my head, cheeks flaming.　　"Huh," the tall one said. "Maybe. Can't imagine what you'd need missile-proof glass and four thousandpounds of body armor for around here. Must be headed somewhere more hazardous."Body armor. Four thousand pounds of body armor. And missile-proof glass? Nice. What hadhappened to good old-fashioned bulletproof?　　Well, at least this made some sense—if you had a twisted sense of humor.　　It wasn't like I hadn't expected Edward to take advantage of our deal, to weight it on his side so that hecould give so much more than he would receive. I'd agreed that he could replace my truck when itneeded replacing, not expecting that moment to come quite so soon, of course. When I'd been forced toadmit that the truck had become no more than a still-life tribute to classic Chevys on my curb, I knew hisidea of a replacement was probably going to embarrass me. Make me the focus of stares and whispers.　　I'd been right about that part. But even in my darkest imaginings I had not foreseen that he would get metwo cars.　　The "before" car and the "after" car, he'd explained when I'd flipped out.　　This was just the "before" car. He'd told me it was a loaner and promised that he was returning it afterthe wedding. It all had made absolutely no sense to me. Until now.　　Ha ha. Because I was so fragilely human, so accident-prone, so much a victim to my own dangerousbad luck, apparently I needed a tank-resistant car to keep me safe. Hilarious. I was sure he and hisbrothers had enjoyed thejoke quite a bit behind my back.　　Or maybe, just maybe,a small voice whispered in my head, it's not a joke, silly. Maybe he's really thatworried about you. This wouldn't be the first time he's gone a little overboard trying to protectyou.　　I sighed.　　I hadn't seen the "after" car yet. It was hidden under a sheet in the deepest corner of the Cullens' garage.　　I knew most people would have peeked by now, but I really didn't want to know.　　Probably no body armor on that car—because I wouldn't need it after the honeymoon. Virtualindestructibility was just one of the many perks I was looking forward to. The best parts about being aCullen were not expensive cars and impressive credit cards.　　"Hey," the tall man called, cupping his hands to the glass in an effort to peer in. "We're done now.　　Thanks a lot!""You're welcome," I called back, and then tensed as I started the engine and eased the pedal—ever sogently—down___No matter how many times I drove down the familiar road home, I still couldn't make the rain-fadedflyers fade into the background. Each one of them, stapled to telephone poles and taped to street signs,was like a fresh slap in the face. A well-deserved slap in the face. My mind was sucked back into thethought I'd interrupted so immediately before. I couldn't avoid it on this road. Not with pictures of myfavorite mechanic flashing past me at regular intervals.　　My best friend. My Jacob.　　Thehave you SEENthis boy? posters were not Jacob's father's idea. It had been my father, Charlie,who'd printed up the flyers and spread them all over town. And not just Forks, but Port Angeles andSequim and Hoquiam and Aberdeen and every other town in the Olympic Peninsula. He'd made surethat all the police stations in the state of Washington had the same flyer hanging on the wall, too. His ownstation had a whole corkboard dedicated to finding Jacob. A corkboard that was mostly empty, much tohis disappointment and frustration.　　My dad was disappointed with more than the lack of response. He was most disappointed with Billy,Jacob's father—and Charlie's closest friend.　　For Billy's not being more involved with the search for his sixteen-year-old "runaway." For Billy'srefusing to put up the flyers in La Push, the reservation on the coast that was Jacob's home. For hisseeming resigned to Jacob's disappearance, as if there was nothing he could do. For his saying, "Jacob'sgrown up now. He'll come home if he wants to."And he was frustrated with me, for taking Billy's side.　　I wouldn't put up posters, either. Because both Billy and I knew where Jacob was, roughly speaking,and we also knew that no one had seen this boy.　　The flyers put the usual big, fat lump in my throat, the usual stinging tears in my eyes, and I was gladEdward was out hunting this Saturday. If Edward saw my reaction, it would only make him feel terrible,too.　　Of course, there were drawbacks to it being Saturday. As I turned slowly and carefully onto my street, Icould see my dad's police cruiser in the driveway of our home. He'd skipped fishing again today. Stillsulking about thewedding.　　So I wouldn't be able to use the phone inside. But I had to call___I parked on the curb behind the Chevy sculpture and pulled the cell phone Edward had given me foremergencies out of the glove compartment. I dialed, keeping my finger on the "end" button as the phonerang. Just in case.　　"Hello?" Seth Clearwater answered, and I sighed in relief. I was way too chicken to speak to his oldersister, Leah. The phrase "bite my head off was not entirely a figure of speech when it came to Leah.　　"Hey, Seth, it's Bella.""Oh, hiya, Bella! How are you?"Choked up. Desperate for reassurance. "Fine.""Calling for an update?""You're psychic.""Not hardly. I'm no Alice—you're just predictable," he joked. Among the Quileute pack down at LaPush, only Seth was comfortable even mentioning the Cullens by name, let alone joking about things likemy nearly omniscient sister-in-law-to-be.　　"I know I am." I hesitated for a minute. "How is he?"Seth sighed. "Same as ever. He won't talk, though we know he hears us. He's trying not to think human,you know. Just going with his instincts.""Do you know where he is now?""Somewhere in northern Canada. I can't tell you which province. He doesn't pay much attention to statelines.""Any hint that he might...""He's not coming home, Bella. Sorry."I swallowed. "S'okay, Seth. I knew before I asked. I just can't help wishing.""Yeah. We all feel the same way.""Thanks for putting up with me, Seth. I know the others must give you a hard time.""They're not your hugest fans," he agreed cheerfully. "Kind of lame, I think. Jacob made his choices, youmade yours. Jake doesn't like their attitude about it. 'Course, he isn't super thrilled that you're checkingup on him, either."I gasped. "I thought he wasn't talking to you?""He can't hide everything from us, hard as he's trying."So Jacob knew I was worried. I wasn't sure how I felt about that. Well, at least he knew I hadn'tskipped off into the sunset and forgotten him completely. He might have imagined me capable of that.　　"I guess I'll see you at the... wedding," I said, forcing the word out through my teeth.　　"Yeah, me and my mom will be there. It was cool of you to ask us."I smiled at the enthusiasm in his voice. Though inviting the Clearwaters had been Edward's idea, I wasglad he'd thought of it. Having Seth there would be nice—a link, however tenuous, to my missing bestman. "It wouldn't be thesame without you.""Tell Edward I said hi, 'kay?""Sure thing."I shook my head. The friendship that had sprung up between Edward and Seth was something that stillboggled my mind. It was proof, though, that things didn't have to be this way. That vampires andwerewolves could get along just fine, thank you very much, if they were of a mind to.　　Not everybody liked this idea.　　"Ah," Seth said, his voice cracking up an octave. "Er, Leah's home.""Oh! Bye!"The phone went dead. I left it on the seat and prepared myself mentally to go inside the house, whereCharlie would be waiting.　　My poor dad had so much to deal with right now. Jacob-the-runaway was just one of the straws on hisoverburdened back. He was almost as worried about me, his barely-a-legal-adult daughter who wasabout to become a Mrs. in just a few days' time.　　I walked slowly through the light rain, remembering the night we'd told him___As the sound of Charlie's cruiser announced his return, the ring suddenly weighed a hundred pounds onmy finger. I wanted to shove my left hand in a pocket, or maybe sit on it, but Edward's cool, firm graspkept it front and center.　　"Stop fidgeting, Bella. Please try to remember that you're not confessing to a murder here.""Easy for you to say."I listened to the ominous sound of my father's boots clomping up the sidewalk. The key rattled in thealready open door. The sound reminded me of that part of the horror movie when the victim realizesshe's forgotten to lock herdeadbolt.　　"Calm down, Bella," Edward whispered, listening to the acceleration of my heart.　　The door slammed against the wall, and I flinched like I'd been Tasered.　　"Hey, Charlie," Edward called, entirely relaxed.　　"No!" I protested under my breath.　　"What?" Edward whispered back.　　"Wait till he hangs his gun up!"Edward chuckled and ran his free hand through his tousled bronze hair.　　Charlie came around the corner, still in his uniform, still armed, and tried not to make a face when hespied us sitting together on the loveseat. Lately, he'd been putting forth a lot of effort to like Edwardmore. Of course, this revelation was sure to end that effort immediately.　　"Hey, kids. What's up?""We'd like to talk to you," Edward said, so serene. "We have some good news."Charlie's expression went from strained friendliness to black suspicion in a second.　　"Good news?" Charlie growled, looking straight at me.　　"Have a seat, Dad."He raised one eyebrow, stared at me for five seconds, then stomped to the recliner and sat down on thevery edge, his back ramrod straight.　　"Don't get worked up, Dad," I said after a moment of loaded silence. "Everything's okay."Edward grimaced, and I knew it was in objection to the word okay. He probably would have usedsomething more like wonderful or perfect or glorious.　　"Sure it is, Bella, sure it is. If everything is so great, then why are you sweating bullets?""I'm not sweating," I lied.　　I leaned away from his fierce scowl, cringing into Edward, and instinctively wiped the back of my righthand across my forehead to remove the evidence.　　"You're pregnant!" Charlie exploded. "You're pregnant, aren't you?"Though the question was clearly meant for me, he was glaring at Edward now, and I could have sworn Isaw his hand twitch toward the gun.　　"No! Of course I'm not!" I wanted to elbow Edward in the ribs, but I knew that move would only giveme a bruise. I'd told Edward that people would immediately jump to this conclusion! What otherpossible reason would sane people have for getting married at eighteen? (His answer then had made meroll my eyes. Love. Right.)Charlie's glower lightened a shade. It was usually pretty clear on my face when I was telling the truth,and he believed me now. "Oh. Sorry.""Apology accepted."There was a long pause. After a moment, I realized everyone was waiting for me to say something. Ilooked up at Edward, panic-stricken. There was no way I was going to get the words out.　　He smiled at me and then squared his shoulders and turned to my father.　　"Charlie, I realize that I've gone about this out of order. Traditionally, I should have asked you first. Imean no disrespect, but since Bella has already said yes and I don't want to diminish her choice in thematter, instead of asking you for her hand, I'm asking you for your blessing. We're getting married,Charlie. I love her more than anything in the world, more than my own life, and—by some miracle—sheloves me that way, too. Will you give us your blessing?"He sounded so sure, so calm. For just an instant, listening to the absolute confidence in his voice, Iexperienced a rare moment of insight, i could see, fleetingly, the way the world looked to him. For thelength of one heartbeat, this news made perfect sense.　　And then I caught sight of the expression on Charlie's face, his eyes now locked on the ring.　　I held my breath while his skin changed colors—fair to red, red to purple, purple to blue. I started to getup—I'mnot sure what I planned to do; maybe use the Heimlich maneuver to make sure he wasn't choking—butEdward squeezed my hand and murmured "Give him a minute" so low that only I could hear.　　The silence was much longer this time. Then, gradually, shade by shade, Charlie's color returned tonormal. His lips pursed, and his eyebrows furrowed; I recognized his "deep in thought" expression. Hestudied the two of us for a long moment, and I felt Edward relax at my side.　　"Guess I'm not that surprised," Charlie grumbled. "Knew I'd have to deal with something like this soonenough."I exhaled.　　"You sure about this?" Charlie demanded, glaring at me.　　"I'm one hundred percent sure about Edward," I told him without missing a beat.　　"Getting married, though? What's the rush?" He eyed me suspiciously again.　　The rush was due to the fact that I was getting closer to nineteen every stinking day, while Edwardstayed frozen in all his seventeen-year-old perfection, as he had for over ninety years. Not that this factnecessitated marriage in my book, but the wedding was required due to the delicate and tangledcompromise Edward and I had made to finally get to this point, the brink of my transformation frommortal to immortal.　　These weren't things I could explain to Charlie.　　"We're going away to Dartmouth together in the fall, Charlie," Edward reminded him. "I'd like to do that,well, the right way. It's how I was raised." He shrugged.　　He wasn't exaggerating; they'd been big on old-fashioned morals during World War I.　　Charlie's mouth twisted to the side. Looking for an angle to argue from. But what could he say? I'dprefer you live in sin first? He was a dad; his hands were tied.　　"Knew this was coming," he muttered to himself, frowning. Then, suddenly, his face went perfectlysmooth and blank.　　"Dad?" I asked anxiously. I glanced at Edward, but I couldn't read his face, either, as he watchedCharlie.　　"Ha!" Charlie exploded. I jumped in my seat. "Ha, ha, ha!"I stared incredulously as Charlie doubled over in laughter; his whole body shook with it.　　I looked at Edward for a translation, but Edward had his lips pressed tightly together, like he was tryingto hold back laughter himself.　　"Okay, fine," Charlie choked out. "Get married." Another roll of laughter shook through him. "But...""But what?" I demanded.　　"But you have to tell your mom! I'm not saying one word to Renee! That's all yours!" He busted intoloud guffaws.　　I paused with my hand on the doorknob, smiling. Sure, at the time, Charlie's words had terrified me. Theultimate doom: telling Renee. Early marriage was higher up on her blacklist than boiling live puppies.　　Who could have foreseen her response? Not me. Certainly not Charlie. Maybe Alice, but I hadn'tthought to ask her.　　"Well, Bella," Renee had said after I'd choked and stuttered out the impossible words: /Worn, I'mmarrying Edward. Tm a little miffed that you waited so long to tell me. Plane tickets only get moreexpensive. Oooh," she'd fretted. "Do you think Phil's cast will be off by then? It will spoil the pictures ifhe's not in a tux—""Back up a second, Mom." I'd gasped. "What do you mean, waited so long? I just got en-en . . ."—I'dbeen unable to force out the word engaged—"things settled, you know, today.""Today? Really? That is a surprise. I assumed ...""What did you assume? When did you assume?""Well, when you came to visit me in April, it looked like things were pretty much sewn up, if you knowwhat I mean. You're not very hard to read, sweetie. But I didn't say anything because I knew it wouldn'tdo any good. You're exactly like Charlie." She'd sighed, resigned. "Once you make up your mind, thereis no reasoning with you. Of course, exactly like Charlie, you stick by your decisions, too."And then she'd said the last thing that I'd ever expected to hear from my mother.　　"You're not making my mistakes, Bella. You sound like you're scared silly, and I'm guessing it's becauseyou're afraid of me." She'd giggled. "Of what I'm going to think. And I know I've said a lot of thingsabout marriage and stupidity—and I'm not taking them back—but you need to realize that those thingsspecifically applied to me. You're a completely different person than I am. You make your own kinds ofmistakes, and I'm sure you'll have your share of regrets in life. But commitment was never your problem,sweetie. You have a better chance of making this work than most forty-year-olds I know." Renee hadlaughed again. "My little middle-aged child. Luckily, you seem to have found another old soul.""You're not... mad? You don't think I'm making a humongous mistake?""Well, sure, I wish you'd wait a few more years. I mean, do I look old enough to be a mother-in-law toyou? Don't answer that. But this isn't about me. This is about you. Are you happy?""I don't know. I'm having an out-of-body experience right now."Renee had chuckled. "Does he make you happy, Bella?""Yes, but—""Are you ever going to want anyone else?""No, but—""But what?""But aren't you going to say that I sound exactly like every other infatuated teenager since the dawn oftime?""You've never been a teenager, sweetie. You know what's best for you."For the last few weeks, Renee had unexpectedly immersed herself in wedding plans. She'd spent hoursevery day on the phone with Edward's mother, Esme—no worries about the in-laws getting along.　　Renee adored Esme, but then, I doubted anyone could help responding that way to my lovablealmost-mother-in-law.　　It let me right off the hook. Edward's family and my family were taking care of the nuptials togetherwithout my having to do or know or think too hard about any of it.　　Charlie was furious, of course, but the sweet part was that he wasn't furious at me. Renee was thetraitor. He'd counted on her to play the heavy. What could he do now, when his ultimate threat—tellingMom—had turned out to be utterly empty? He had nothing, and he knew it. So he moped around thehouse, muttering things about not being able to trust anyone in this world___"Dad?" I called as I pushed open the front door. "I'm home.""Hold on, Bells, stay right there.""Huh?" I asked, pausing automatically.　　"Gimme a second. Ouch, you got me, Alice."Alice?　　"Sorry, Charlie," Alice's trilling voice responded. "How's that?""I'm bleeding on it.""You're fine. Didn't break the skin—trust me.""What's going on?" I demanded, hesitating in the doorway.　　"Thirty seconds, please, Bella," Alice told me. "Your patience will be rewarded.""Humph," Charlie added.　　I tapped my foot, counting each beat. Before I got to thirty, Alice said, "Okay, Bella, come in!"Moving with caution, I rounded the little corner into our living room.　　"Oh," I huffed. "Aw. Dad. Don't you look—""Silly?" Charlie interrupted.　　"I was thinking more like debonair"Charlie blushed. Alice took his elbow and tugged him around into a slow spin to showcase the pale graytux.　　"Now cut that out, Alice. I look like an idiot.""No one dressed by me ever looks like an idiot.""She's right, Dad. You look fabulous! What's the occasion?"Alice rolled her eyes. "It's the final check on the fit. For both of you."I peeled my gaze off the unusually elegant Charlie for the first time and saw the dreaded white garmentbag laid carefully across the sofa.　　"Aaah.""Go to your happy place, Bella. It won't take long."I sucked in a deep breath and closed my eyes. Keeping them shut, I stumbled my way up the stairs tomy room. I stripped down to my underwear and held my arms straight out.　　"You'd think I was shoving bamboo splinters under your nails," Alice muttered to herself as she followedme in.　　I paid no attention to her. I was in my happy place.　　In my happy place, the whole wedding mess was over and done. Behind me. Already repressed andforgotten.　　We were alone, just Edward and me. The setting was fuzzy and constantly in flux—it morphed frommisty forest to cloud-covered city to arctic night—because Edward was keeping the location of ourhoneymoon a secret to surprise me. But I wasn't especially concerned about the where part.　　Edward and I were together, and I'd fulfilled my side of our compromise perfectly. I'd married him. Thatwas the big one. But I'd also accepted all his outrageous gifts and was registered, however futilely, toattend Dartmouth College in the fall. Now it was his turn.　　Before he turned me into a vampire—his big compromise—he had one other stipulation to make goodon.　　Edward had an obsessive sort of concern over the human things that I would be giving up, theexperiences he didn't want me to miss. Most of them—like the prom, for example—seemed silly to me.　　There was only one human experience I worried about missing. Of course it would be the one he wishedI would forget completely.　　Here was the thing, though. I knew a little about what I was going to be like when I wasn't humananymore. I'd seen newborn vampires firsthand, and I'd heard all my family-to-be's stories about thosewild early days. For several years, my biggest personality trait was going to be thirsty, it would takesome time before I could be me again. And even when I was in control of myself, I would never feelexactly the way I felt now.　　Human... and passionately in love.　　I wanted the complete experience before I traded in my warm, breakable, pheromone-riddled body forsomething beautiful, strong... and unknown. I wanted a real honeymoon with Edward. And, despite thedanger he feared this would put me in, he'd agreed to try.　　I was only vaguely aware of Alice and the slip and slide of satin over my skin. I didn't care, for themoment, that the whole town was talking about me. I didn't think about the spectacle I would have tostar in much too soon. I didn't worry about tripping on my train or giggling at the wrong moment or beingtoo young or the staring audience or even the empty seat where my best friend should be.　　I was with Edward in my happy place.
    Chapter 2 Long Night
    "I miss you already.""I don't need to leave. I can stay___""Mmm."It was quiet for a long moment, just the thud of my heart hammering, the broken rhythm of our raggedbreathing, and the whisper of our lips moving in synchronization.　　Sometimes it was so easy to forget that I was kissing a vampire. Not because he seemed ordinary orhuman—I could never for a second forget that I was holding someone more angel than man in myarms—but because he made it seem like nothing at all to have his lips against my lips, my face, my throat.　　He claimed he was long past the temptation my blood used to be for him, that the idea of losing me hadcured him of any desire for it. But I knew the smell of my blood still caused him pain—still burned histhroat like he was inhaling flames.　　I opened my eyes and found his open, too, staring at my face. It made no sense when he looked at methat way. Like I was the prize rather than the outrageously lucky winner.　　Our gazes locked for a moment; his golden eyes were so deep that I imagined I could see all the wayinto his soul. It seemed silly that this fact—the existence of his soul—had ever been in question, even ifhe was a vampire. He had the most beautiful soul, more beautiful than his brilliant mind or hisincomparable face or his glorious body.　　He looked back at me as if he could see my soul, too, and as if he liked what he saw.　　He couldn't see into my mind, though, the way he saw into everyone else's. Who knew why—somestrange glitch in my brain that made it immune to all the extraordinary and frightening things someimmortals could do. (Only my mind was immune; my body was still subject to vampires with abilities thatworked in ways other than Edward's.) But I was seriously grateful to whatever malfunction it was thatkept my thoughts a secret. It was just too embarrassing to consider the alternative.　　I pulled his face to mine again.　　"Definitely staying," he murmured a moment later.　　"No, no. It's your bachelor party. You have to go."I said the words, but the fingers of my right hand locked into his bronze hair, my left pressed tighteragainst the small of his back. His cool hands stroked my face.　　"Bachelor parties are designed for those who are sad to see the passing of their single days. I couldn't bemore eager to have mine behind me. So there's really no point.""True." I breathed against the winter-cold skin of his throat.　　This was pretty close to my happy place. Charlie slept obliviously in his room, which was almost asgood as being alone. We were curled up on my small bed, intertwined as much as it was possible,considering the thick afghan I was swathed in like a cocoon. I hated the necessity of the blanket, but itsort of ruined the romance when my teeth started chattering. Charlie would notice if I turned the heat onin August___At least, if / had to be bundled up, Edward's shirt was on the floor. I never got over the shock of howperfect his body was—white, cool, and polished as marble. I ran my hand down his stone chest now,tracing across the flat planes of his stomach, just marveling. A light shudder rippled through him, and hismouth found mine again. Carefully, I let the tip of my tongue press against his glass-smooth lip, and hesighed. His sweet breath washed—cold and delicious—over my face.　　He started to pull away—that was his automatic response whenever he decided things had gone too far,his reflex reaction whenever he most wanted to keep going. Edward had spent most of his life rejectingany kind of physical gratification. I knew it was terrifying to him trying to change those habits now.　　"Wait," I said, gripping his shoulders and hugging myself close to him. I kicked one leg free and wrappedit around his waist. "Practice makes perfect."He chuckled. "Well, we should be fairly close to perfection by this point, then, shouldn't we? Have youslept at all in the last month?""But this is the dress rehearsal," I reminded him, "and we've only practiced certain scenes. It's no timefor playing safe."I thought he would laugh, but he didn't answer, and his body was motionless with sudden stress. Thegold in his eyes seemed to harden from a liquid to a solid.　　I thought over my words, realized what he would have heard in them.　　"Bella...," he whispered.　　"Don't start this again," I said. "A deal's a deal.""I don't know. It's too hard to concentrate when you're with me like this. I—I can't think straight. I won'tbe able to control myself. You'll get hurt.""I'll be fine.""Bella . ..""Shh!" I pressed my lips to his to stop his panic attack. I'd heard it before. He wasn't getting out of thisdeal. Not after insisting I marry him first.　　He kissed me back for a moment, but I could tell he wasn't as into it as before. Worrying, alwaysworrying. How different it would be when he didn't need to worry about me anymore. What would he dowith all his free time? He'd have to get a new hobby.　　"How are your feet?" he asked.　　Knowing he didn't mean that literally, I answered, Toasty warm.""Really? No second thoughts? It's not too late to change your mind.""Are you trying to ditch me?"He chuckled. "Just making sure. I don't want you to do anything you're not sure about.""I'm sure about you. The rest I can live through."He hesitated, and I wondered if I'd put my foot in my mouth again.　　"Can you?" he asked quietly. "I don't mean the wedding—which I am positive you will survive despiteyour qualms—but afterward... what about Renee, what about Charlie?"I sighed. "I'll miss them." Worse, that they would miss me, but I didn't want to give him any fuel.　　"Angela and Ben and Jessica and Mike.""I'll miss my friends, too." I smiled in the darkness. "Especially Mike. Oh, Mike! How will I go on?"He growled.　　I laughed but then was serious. "Edward, we've been through this and through this. I know it will behard, but this is what I want. I want you, and I want you forever. One lifetime is simply not enough forme.""Frozen forever at eighteen," he whispered.　　"Every woman's dream come true," I teased.　　"Never changing... never moving forward.""What does that mean?"He answered slowly. "Do you remember when we told Charlie we were getting married? And hethought you were... pregnant?""And he thought about shooting you," I guessed with a laugh. "Admit it—for one second, he honestlyconsidered it."He didn't answer.　　"What, Edward?""I just wish... well, I wish that he'd been right.""Gah," I gasped.　　"More that there was some way he could have been. That we had that kind of potential. I hate takingthat away from you, too."It took me a minute. "I know what I'm doinq.""How could you know that, Bella? Look at my mother, look at my sister. It's not as easy a sacrifice asyouimagine.""Esme and Rosalie get by just fine. If it's a problem later, we can do what Esme did—we'll adopt."He sighed, and then his voice was fierce. "It's not right I don't want you to have to make sacrifices forme. I want to give you things, not take things away from you. I don't want to steal your future. If I werehuman—"I put my hand over his lips. "You are my future. Now stop. No moping, or I'm calling your brothers tocome and get you. Maybe you need a bachelor party.""I'm sorry. I am moping, aren't I? Must be the nerves.""Are your feet cold?""Not in that sense. I've been waiting a century to marry you, Miss Swan. The wedding ceremony is theone thing I can't wait—" He broke off mid-thought. "Oh, for the love of all that's holy!""What's wrong?"He gritted his teeth. "You don't have to call my brothers. Apparently Emmett and Jasper are not going tolet me bow out tonight."I clutched him closer for one second and then released him. I didn't have a prayer of winning atug-of-war with Emmett. "Have fun."There was a squeal against the window—someone deliberately scraping their steel nails across the glassto make a horrible, cover-your-ears, goose-bumps-down-your-spine noise. I shuddered.　　"If you don't send Edward out," Emmett—still invisible in the night—hissed menacingly, "we're coming inafter him!""Go," I laughed. "Before they break my house."Edward rolled his eyes, but he got to his feet in one fluid movement and had his shirt back on in another.　　He leaned down and kissed my forehead.　　"Get to sleep. You've got a big day tomorrow.""Thanks! That's sure to help me wind down.""I'll meet you at the altar.""HI be the one in white." I smiled at how perfectly blase I sounded.　　He chuckled, said, "Very convincing," and then suddenly sank into a crouch, his muscles coiled like aspring. He vanished—launching himself out my window too swiftly for my eyes to follow.　　Outside, there was a muted thud, and I heard Emmett curse.　　"You'd better not make him late," I murmured, knowing they could hear.　　And then Jaspers face was peering in my window, his honey hair silver in the weak moonlight thatworked through the clouds.　　"Don't worry, Bella. We'll get him home in plenty of time."I was suddenly very calm, and my qualms all seemed unimportant. Jasper was, in his own way, just astalentedas Alice with her uncannily accurate predictions. Jasper's medium was moods rather than the future, andit was impossible to resist feeling the way he wanted you to feel.　　I sat up awkwardly, still tangled in my blanket. "Jasper? What do vampires do for bachelor parties?　　You're not taking him to a strip club, are you?""Don't tell her anything!" Emmett growled from below. There was another thud, and Edward laughedquietly.　　"Relax," Jasper told me—and I did. "We Cullens have our own version. Just a few mountain lions, acouple of grizzly bears. Pretty much an ordinary night out."I wondered if I would ever be able to sound so cavalier about the "vegetarian" vampire diet.　　"Thanks, Jasper."He winked and dropped from sight.　　It was completely silent outside. Charlie's muffled snores droned through the walls.　　I lay back against my pillow, sleepy now. I stared at the walls of my little room, bleached pale in themoonlight, from under heavy lids.　　My last night in my room. My last night as Isabella Swan. Tomorrow night, I would be Bella Cullen.　　Though the whole marriage ordeal was a thorn in my side, I had to admit that I liked the sound of that.　　I let my mind wander idly for a moment, expecting sleep to take me. But, after a few minutes, I foundmyself more alert, anxiety creeping back into my stomach, twisting it into uncomfortable positions. Thebed seemed too soft, too warm without Edward in it. Jasper was far away, and all the peaceful, relaxedfeelings were gone with him.　　It was going to be a very long day tomorrow.　　I was aware that most of my fears were stupid—I just had to get over myself. Attention was aninevitable part of life. I couldn't always blend in with the scenery. However, I did have a few specificworries that were completely valid.　　First there was the wedding dress's train. Alice clearly had let her artistic sense overpower practicalitieson that one. Maneuvering the Cullens' staircase in heels and a train sounded impossible. I should havepracticed.　　Then there was the guest list.　　Tanya's family, the Denali clan, would be arriving sometime before the ceremony.　　It would be touchy to have Tanya's family in the same room with our guests from the Quileutereservation, Jacob's father and the Clearwaters. The Denalis were no fans of the werewolves. In fact,Tanya's sister irina was not coming to the wedding at all. She still nursed a vendetta against thewerewolves for killing her friend Laurent (just as he was about to kill me). Thanks to that grudge, theDenalis had abandoned Edward's family in their worst hour of need. It had been the unlikely alliance withthe Quileute wolves that had saved all our lives when the horde of newborn vampires had attacked___Edward had promised me it wouldn't be dangerous to have the Denalis near the Quileutes. Tanya and allherfamily—besides Irina—felt horribly guilty for that defection. A truce with the werewolves was a smallprice to make up some of that debt, a price they were prepared to pay.　　That was the big problem, but there was a small problem, too: my fragile self-esteem.　　I'd never seen Tanya before, but I was sure that meeting her wouldn't be a pleasant experience for myego. Once upon a time, before I was born probably, she'd made her play for Edward—not that I blamedher or anyone else for wanting him. Still, she would be beautiful at the very least and magnificent at best.　　Though Edward clearly—if inconceivably—preferred me, I wouldn't be able to help makingcomparisons.　　I had grumbled a little until Edward, who knew my weaknesses, made me feel guilty.　　"We're the closest thing they have to family, Bella,'7he'd reminded me. "They still feel like orphans, youknow, even after all this time."So I'd conceded, hiding my frown.　　Tanya had a big family now, almost as big as the Cullens. There were five of them; Tanya, Kate, andIrina had been joined by Carmen and Eleazar much the same way the Cullens had been joined by Aliceand Jasper, all of them bonded by their desire to live more compassionately than normal vampires did.　　For all the company, though, Tanya and her sisters were still alone in one way. Still in mourning. Becausea very long time ago, they'd had a mother, too.　　I could imagine the hole that loss would leave, even after a thousand years; I tried to visualize the Cullenfamily without their creator, their center, and their guide—their father, Carlisle. I couldn't see it.　　Carlisle had explained Tanya's history during one of the many nights I'd stayed late at the Cullens' home,learning as much as I could, preparing as much as was possible for the future I'd chosen. Tanya'smother's story was one among many, a cautionary tale illustrating just one of the rules I would need to beaware of when I joined the immortal world. Only one rule, actually—one law that broke down into athousand different facets: Keep the secret.　　Keeping the secret meant a lot of things—living inconspicuously like the Cullens, moving on beforehumans could suspect they weren't aging. Or keeping clear of humans altogether—except atmealtime—the way nomads like James and Victoria had lived; the way Jasper's friends, Peter andCharlotte, still lived. It meant keeping control of whatever new vampires you created, like Jasper haddone when he'd lived with Maria. Like Victoria had failed to do with her newborns.　　And it meant not creating some things in the first place, because some creations were uncontrollable.　　"I don't know Tanya's mother's name," Carlisle had admitted, his golden eyes, almost the exact shade ofhis fair hair, sad with remembering Tanya's pain. "They never speak of her if they can avoid it, never thinkofherwillingly.　　"The woman who created Tanya, Kate, and Irina—who loved them, I believe—lived many years beforeI was born, during a time of plague in our world, the plague of the immortal children.　　"What they were thinking, those ancient ones, I can't begin to understand. They created vampires out ofhumans who were barely more than infants."I'd had to swallow back the bile that rose in my throat as I'd pictured what he was describing.　　"They were very beautiful," Carlisle had explained quickly, seeing my reaction. "So endearing, soenchanting, you can't imagine. You had but to be near them to love them; it was an automatic thing.　　"However, they could not be taught. They were frozen at whatever level of development they'd achievedbeforebeing bitten. Adorable two-year-olds with dimples and lisps that could destroy half a village in one oftheir tantrums. If they hungered, they fed, and no words of warning could restrain them. Humans sawthem, stories circulated, fear spread like fire in dry brush___"Tanya's mother created such a child. As with the other ancients, i cannot fathom her reasons." He'dtaken a deep, steadying breath. "The Volturi became involved, of course."I'd flinched as I always did at that name, but of course the legion of Italian vampires—royalty in theirown estimation—was central to this story. There couldn't be a law if there was no punishment; therecouldn't be a punishment if there was no one to deliver it. The ancients Aro, Caius, and Marcus ruled theVolturi forces; I'd only met them once, but in that brief encounter, it seemed to me that Aro, with hispowerful mind-reading gift—one touch, and he knew every thought a mind had ever held—was the trueleader.　　"The Volturi studied the immortal children, at home in Volterra and all around the world. Caius decidedthe young ones were incapable of protecting our secret. And so they had to be destroyed.　　"I told you they were loveable. Well, covens fought to the last man—were utterly decimated—to protectthem. The carnage was not as widespread as the southern wars on this continent, but more devastating inits own way. Long-established covens, old traditions, friends... Much was lost. In the end, the practicewas completely eliminated. The immortal children became unmentionable, a taboo.　　"When I lived with the Volturi, I met two immortal children, so I know firsthand the appeal they had.　　Aro studied the little ones for many years after the catastrophe they'd caused was over. You know hisinquisitive disposition; he was hopeful that they could be tamed. But in the end, the decision wasunanimous: the immortal children could not be allowed to exist."I'd all but forgotten the Denali sisters' mother when the story returned to her.　　"It is unclear precisely what happened with Tanya's mother," Carlisle had said. "Tanya, Kate, and irinawere entirely oblivious until the day the Volturi came for them, their mother and her illegal creationalready their prisoners. It was ignorance that saved Tanya's and her sisters' lives. Aro touched them andsaw their total innocence, so they were not punished with their mother.　　"None of them had ever seen the boy before, or dreamed of his existence, until the day they watchedhim burn in their mother's arms. I can only guess that their mother had kept her secret to protect themfrom this exact outcome. But why had she created him in the first place? Who was he, and what had hemeant to her that would cause her to cross this most uncrossable of lines? Tanya and the others neverreceived an answer to any of these questions. But they could not doubt their mother's guilt, and I don'tthink they've ever truly forgiven her.　　"Even with Aro's perfect assurance that Tanya, Kate, and Irina were innocent, Caius wanted them toburn. Guilty by association. They were lucky that Aro felt like being merciful that day. Tanya and hersisters were pardoned, but left with unhealing hearts and a very healthy respect for the law___"I'm not sure where exactly the memory turned into a dream. One moment it seemed that I was listeningto Carlisle in my memory, looking at his face, and then a moment later I was looking at a gray, barrenfield and smellingthe thick scent of burning incense in the air. I was not alone there.　　The huddle of figures in the center of the field, all shrouded in ashy cloaks, should have terrified me—they could only be Volturi, and I was, against what they'd decreed at our last meeting, still human. ButI knew, as I sometimes did in dreams, that I was invisible to them.　　Scattered all around me were smoking heaps. I recognized the sweetness in the air and did not examinethe mounds too closely. I had no desire to see the faces of the vampires they had executed, half afraidthat I might recognize someone in the smoldering pyres.　　The Volturi soldiers stood in a circle around something or someone, and I heard their whispery voicesraised in agitation. I edged closer to the cloaks, compelled by the dream to see whatever thing or personthey were examining with such intensity. Creeping carefully between two of the tall hissing shrouds, Ifinally saw the object of their debate, raised up on a little hillock above them.　　He was beautiful, adorable, just as Carlisle had described. The boy was a toddler still, maybe two yearsof age. Light brown curls framed his cherubic face with its round cheeks and full lips. And he wastrembling, his eyes closed as if he was too frightened to watch death coming closer every second.　　I was struck with such a powerful need to save the lovely, terrified child that the Volturi, despite all theirdevastating menace, no longer mattered to me. I shoved past them, not caring if they realized mypresence. Breaking free of them altogether, I sprinted toward the boy.　　Only to stagger to a halt as I got a clear view of the hillock that he sat upon. It was not earth and rock,but a pile of human bodies, drained and lifeless. Too late not to see these faces. I knew them all—Angela, Ben, Jessica, Mike.... And directly beneath the adorable boy were the bodies of my fatherand my mother.　　The child opened his bright, bloodred eyes.
    Chapter 3 Big Day
    My own eyes flew open.　　I lay shivering and gasping in my warm bed for several minutes, trying to break free of the dream. Thesky outside my window turned gray and then pale pink while I waited for my heart to slow.　　When I was fully back to the reality of my messy, familiar room, I was a little annoyed with myself. Whata dream to have the night before my wedding! That's what I got for obsessing over disturbing stories inthe middle of the night.　　Eager to shake off the nightmare, I got dressed and headed down to the kitchen long before I needed to.　　First I cleaned the already tidy rooms, and then when Charlie was up I made him pancakes. I was muchtoo keyed up to have any interest in eating breakfast myself—I sat bouncing in my seat while he ate.　　"You're picking up Mr. Weber at three o'clock," I reminded him.　　"I don't have that much to do today besides bring the minister, Bells. I'm not likely to forget my onlyjob." Charlie had taken the entire day off for the wedding, and he was definitely at loose ends. Now andthen, his eyes flickered furtively to the closet under the stairs, where he kept his fishing gear.　　"That's not your only job. You also have to be dressed and presentable."He scowled into his cereal bowl and muttered the words "monkey suit" under his breath.　　There was a brisk tapping on the front door.　　"You think you have it bad," I said, grimacing as I rose. "Alice will be working on me all day long."Charlie nodded thoughtfully, conceding that he did have the lesser ordeal. I ducked in to kiss the top ofhis head as I passed—he blushed and harrumphed —and then continued on to get the door for my bestgirlfriend and soon-to-be sister.　　Alice's short black hair was not in its usual spiky do—it was smoothed into sleek pin curls around herpixie face, which wore a contrastingly businesslike expression. She dragged me from the house withbarely a "Hey, Charlie"called over her shoulder.　　Alice appraised me as I got into her Porsche.　　"Oh, hell, look at your eyes!" She tsked in reproach. "What did you do? Stay up all night?""Almost."She glowered. "I've only allotted so much time to make you stunning, Bella—you might have takenbetter care of my raw material.""No one expects me to be stunning. I think the bigger problem is that I might fall asleep during theceremony and not be able to say 1 do' at the right part, and then Edward will make his escape."She laughed. "I'll throw my bouquet at you when it gets close.""Thanks.""At least you'll have plenty of time to sleep on the plane tomorrow."I raised one eyebrow. Tomorrow, I mused. If we were heading out tonight after the reception, and wewould still be on a plane tomorrow... well, we weren't going to Boise, Idaho. Edward hadn't dropped asingle hint. I wasn't too stressed about the mystery, but it was strange not knowing where I would besleeping tomorrow night. Or hopefully not sleeping ...　　Alice realized that she'd given something away, and she frowned.　　"You're all packed and ready," she said to distract me.　　It worked. "Alice, I wish you would let me pack my own things!""It would have given too much away.""And denied you an opportunity to shop.""You'll be my sister officially in ten short hours... it's about time to get over this aversion to new clothes."I glowered groggily out the windshield until we were almost to the house.　　"Is he back yet?" I asked.　　"Don't worry, he'll be there before the music starts. But you don't get to see him, no matter when he getsback. We're doing this the traditional way."I snorted. "Traditional!""Okay, aside from the bride and groom.""You know he's already peeked.""Oh no—that's why I'm the only one who's seen you in the dress. I've been very careful to not thinkabout it when he's around.""Well," I said as we turned into the drive, "I see you got to reuse your graduation decorations." Threemiles of drive were once again wrapped in hundreds of thousands of twinkle lights. This time, she'dadded white satin bows.　　"Waste not, want not. Enjoy this, because you don't get to see the inside decorations until it's time." Shepulled into the cavernous garage north of the main house; Emmett's big Jeep was still gone.　　"Since when is the bride not allowed to see the decorations?" I protested.　　"Since she put me in charge. I want you to get the full impact coming down the stairs."She clapped her hand over my eyes before she let me inside the kitchen. I was immediately assailed bythe scent.　　"What is that?" I wondered as she guided me into the house.　　"Is it too much?" Alice's voice was abruptly worried. "You're the first human in here; I hope I got itright.""it smells wonderful!" I assured her—almost intoxicating, but not at all overwhelming, the balance of thedifferent fragrances was subtle and flawless. "Orange blossoms... lilac... and something else—am I right?""Very good, Bella. You only missed the freesia and the roses."She didn't uncover my eyes until we were in her oversized bathroom. I stared at the long counter,covered in all the paraphernalia of a beauty salon, and began to feel my sleepless night.　　"Is this really necessary? I'm going to look plain next to him no matter what."She pushed me down into a low pink chair. "No one will dare to call you plain when I'm through withyou.""Only because they're afraid you'll suck their blood," I muttered. I leaned back in the chair and closedmy eyes, hoping I'd be able to nap through it. I did drift in and out a little bit while she masked, buffed,and polished every surface of my body.　　It was after lunchtime when Rosalie glided past the bathroom door in a shimmery silver gown with hergolden hair piled up in a soft crown on top of her head. She was so beautiful it made me want to cry.　　What was even the point of dressing up with Rosalie around?　　"They're back," Rosalie said, and immediately my childish fit of despair passed. Edward was home.　　"Keep him out of here!""He won't cross you today," Rosalie reassured her. "He values his life too much. Esme's got themfinishing things up out back. Do you want some help? I could do her hair."My jaw fell open. I floundered around in my head, trying to remember how to close it.　　I had never been Rosalie's favorite person in the world. Then, making things even more strained betweenus, she was personally offended by the choice I was making now. Though she had her impossible beauty,her loving family, and her soul mate in Emmett, she would have traded it all to be human. And here I was,callously throwing away everything she wanted in life like it was garbage. It didn't exactly warm her tome.　　"Sure," Alice said easily. "You can start braiding. I want it intricate. The veil goes here, underneath." Herhands started combing through my hair, hefting it, twisting it, illustrating in detail what she wanted. Whenshe was done, Rosalie's hands replaced hers, shaping my hair with a feather-light touch. Alice movedback to my face.　　Once Rosalie received Alice's commendation on my hair, she was sent off to retrieve my dress and thento locate Jasper, who had been dispatched to pick up my mother and her husband, Phil, from their hotel.　　Downstairs, I could faintly hear the door opening and closing over and over. Voices began to float up tous.　　Alice made me stand so that she could ease the dress over my hair and makeup. My knees shook sobadly as she fastened the long line of pearl buttons up my back that the satin quivered in little waveletsdown to the floor.　　"Deep breaths, Bella/7Alice said. "And try to lower your heart rate. You're going to sweat off your newface."I gave her the best sarcastic expression I could manage. "I'll get right on that.""I have to get dressed now. Can you hold yourself together for two minutes?""Urn... maybe?"She rolled her eyes and darted out the door.　　I concentrated on my breathing, counting each movement of my lungs, and stared at the patterns that thebathroom light made on the shiny fabric of my skirt. I was afraid to look in the mirror—afraid the imageof myself in the wedding dress would send me over the edge into a full-scale panic attack.　　Alice was back before I had taken two hundred breaths, in a dress that flowed down her slender bodylike a silvery waterfall.　　"Alice—wow.""It's nothing. No one will be looking at me today. Not while you're in the room.""Har har.""Now, are you in control of yourself, or do I have to bring Jasper up here?""They're back? Is my mom here?""She just walked in the door. She's on her way up."Renee had flown in two days ago, and I'd spent every minute I could with her—every minute that Icould pry her away from Esme and the decorations, in other words. As far as I could tell, she was havingmore fun with this than a kid locked inside Disneyland overnight. In a way, I felt almost as cheated asCharlie. All that wasted terror over her reaction...　　"Oh, Bella!" she squealed now, gushing before she was all the way through the door. "Oh, honey, you'reso beautiful! Oh, I'm going to cry! Alice, you're amazing! You and Esme should go into business aswedding planners. Where did you find this dress? It's gorgeous! So graceful, so elegant. Bella, you looklike you just stepped out of an Austen movie." My mother's voice sounded a little distance away, andeverything in the room was slightly blurry. "Such a creative idea, designing the theme around Bella's ring.　　So romantic! To think it's been in Edward's family since the eighteen hundreds!"Alice and I exchanged a brief conspiratorial look. My mom was off on the dress style by more than ahundred years. The wedding wasn't actually centered around the ring, but around Edward himself.　　There was a loud, gruff throat-clearing in the doorway.　　"Renee, Esme said it's time you got settled down there," Charlie said.　　"Well, Charlie, don't you look dashing!" Renee said in a tone that was almost shocked. That might haveexplained the crustiness of Charlie's answer.　　"Alice got to me.""Is it really time already?" Renee said to herself, sounding almost as nervous as I felt. "This has all goneso fast. I feel dizzy."That made two of us.　　"Give me a hug before I go down/7Renee insisted. "Carefully now, don't tear anything."My mother squeezed me gently around the waist, then wheeled for the door, only to complete the spinand face me again.　　"Oh goodness, I almost forgot! Charlie, Where's the box?"My dad rummaged in his pockets for a minute and then produced a small white box, which he handed toRenee. Renee lifted the lid and held it out to me.　　"Something blue," she said.　　"Something old, too. They were your Grandma Swan's," Charlie added. "We had a jeweler replace thepaste stones with sapphires."Inside the box were two heavy silver hair combs. Dark blue sapphires were clustered into intricate floralshapes atop the teeth.　　My throat got all thick. "Mom, Dad... you shouldn't have.""Alice wouldn't let us do anything else," Renee said. "Every time we tried, she all but ripped our throatsout."A hysterical giggle burst through my lips.　　Alice stepped up and quickly slid both combs into my hair under the edge of the thick braids. "That'ssomething old and something blue," Alice mused, taking a few steps back to admire me. "And your dressis new... so here—"She flicked something at me. I held my hands out automatically, and the filmy white garter landed in mypalms.　　"That's mine and I want it back," Alice told me.　　I blushed.　　"There," Alice said with satisfaction. "A little color—that's all you needed. You are officially perfect."With a little self-congratulatory smile, she turned to my parents. "Renee, you need to get downstairs.""Yes, ma'am." Renee blew me a kiss and hurried out the door.　　"Charlie, would you grab the flowers, please?"While Charlie was out of the room, Alice hooked the garter out of my hands and then ducked under myskirt. I gasped and tottered as her cold hand caught my ankle; she yanked the garter into place.　　She was back on her feet before Charlie returned with the two frothy white bouquets. The scent of rosesand orange blossom and freesia enveloped me in a soft mist.　　Rosalie—the best musician in the family next to Edward—began playing the piano downstairs.　　Pachelbel's Canon. I began hyperventilating.　　"Easy, Bells," Charlie said. He turned to Alice nervously. "She looks a little sick. Do you think she'sgoing to make it?"His voice sounded far away. I couldn't feel my legs.　　"She'd better."Alice stood right in front of me, on her tiptoes to better stare me in the eye, and gripped my wrists in herhardhands.　　"Focus, Bella. Edward is waiting for you down there."1 took a deep breath, willing myself into composure.　　The music slowly morphed into a new song. Charlie nudged me. "Bells, we're up to bat.""Bella?" Alice asked, still holding my gaze.　　"Yes," I squeaked. "Edward. Okay." I let her pull me from the room, with Charlie tagging along at myelbow.　　The music was louder in the hall. It floated up the stairs along with the fragrance of a million flowers. Iconcentrated on the idea of Edward waiting below to get my feet to shuffle forward.　　The music was familiar, Wagner's traditional march surrounded by a flood of embellishments.　　"It's my turn," Alice chimed. "Count to five and follow me." She began a slow, graceful dance down thestaircase. I should have realized that having Alice as my only bridesmaid was a mistake. I would look thatmuch more uncoordinated coming behind her.　　A sudden fanfare trilled through the soaring music. I recognized my cue.　　"Don't let me fall, Dad," I whispered. Charlie pulled my hand through his arm and then grasped it tightly.　　One step ata time, I told myself as we began to descend to the slow tempo of the march. I didn't lift myeyes until my feet were safely on the flat ground, though I could hear the murmurs and rustling of theaudience as I came into view. Blood flooded my cheeks at the sound; of course I could be counted on tobe the blushing bride.　　As soon as my feet were past the treacherous stairs, I was looking for him. For a brief second, I wasdistracted by the profusion of white blossoms that hung in garlands from everything in the room thatwasn't alive, dripping with long lines of white gossamer ribbons. But I tore my eyes from the bowerycanopy and searched across the rows of satin-draped chairs—blushing more deeply as I took in thecrowd of faces all focused on me—until I found him at last, standing before an arch overflowing withmore flowers, more gossamer.　　I was barely conscious that Carlisle stood by his side, and Angela's father behind them both. I didn't seemy mother where she must have been sitting in the front row, or my new family, or any of the guests—they would have to wait till later.　　All I really saw was Edward's face; it filled my vision and overwhelmed my mind. His eyes were abuttery, burning gold; his perfect face was almost severe with the depth of his emotion. And then, as hemet my awed gaze, he broke into a breathtaking smile of exultation.　　Suddenly, it was only the pressure of Charlie's hand on mine that kept me from sprinting headlong downthe aisle.　　The march was too slow as I struggled to pace my steps to its rhythm. Mercifully, the aisle was veryshort. And then, at last, at last, I was there. Edward held out his hand. Charlie took my hand and, in asymbol as old as the world, placed it in Edward's. I touched the cool miracle of his skin, and I was home.　　Our vows were the simple, traditional words that had been spoken a million times, though never by acouple quite like us. We'd asked Mr. Weber to make only one small change. He obligingly traded theline "till death do uspart" for the more appropriate "as long as we both shall live."In that moment, as the minister said his part, my world, which had been upside down for so long now,seemed to settle into its proper position. I saw just how silly I'd been for fearing this—as if it were anunwanted birthday gift or an embarrassing exhibition, like the prom. I looked into Edward's shining,triumphant eyes and knew that I was winning, too. Because nothing else mattered but that I could staywithhim.　　I didn't realize I was crying until it was time to say the binding words.　　"I do," I managed to choke out in a nearly unintelligible whisper, blinking my eyes clear so I could see hisface.　　When it was his turn to speak, the words rang clear and victorious.　　"I do," he vowed.　　Mr. Weber declared us husband and wife, and then Edward's hands reached up to cradle my face,carefully, as if it were as delicate as the white petals swaying above our heads. I tried to comprehend,through the film of tears blinding me, the surreal fact that this amazing person was mine. His golden eyeslooked as if they would have tears, too, if such a thing were not impossible. He bent his head towardmine, and I stretched up on the tips of my toes, throwing my arms—bouquet and all—around his neck.　　He kissed me tenderly, adoringly; I forgot the crowd, the place, the time, the reason... only rememberingthat he loved me, that he wanted me, that I was his.　　He began the kiss, and he had to end it; I clung to him, ignoring the titters and the throat-clearing in theaudience. Finally, his hands restrained my face and he pulled back—too soon—to look at me. On thesurface his sudden smile was amused, almost a smirk. But underneath his momentary entertainment at mypublic exhibition was a deep joy that echoed my own.　　The crowd erupted into applause, and he turned our bodies to face our friends and family. I couldn'tlook away from his face to see them.　　My mother's arms were the first to find me, her tear-streaked face the first thing I saw when I finally toremy eyes unwillingly from Edward. And then I was handed through the crowd, passed from embrace toembrace, only vaguely aware of who held me, my attention centered on Edward's hand clutched tightly inmy own. I did recognize the difference between the soft, warm hugs of my human friends and the gentle,cool embraces of my new family.　　One scorching hug stood out from all the others—Seth Clearwater had braved the throng of vampires tostand in for my lost werewolf friend.
    Chapter 4 Gesture
    The wedding flowed into the reception party smoothly—proof of Alice's flawless planning. It was justtwilight over the river; the ceremony had lasted exactly the right amount of time, allowing the sun to setbehind the trees. The lights in the trees glimmered as Edward led me through the glass back doors,making the white flowers glow. There were another ten thousand flowers out here, serving as a fragrant,airy tent over the dance floor set up on the grass under two of the ancient cedars.　　Things slowed down, relaxed as the mellow August evening surrounded us. The little crowd spread outunder the soft shine of the twinkle lights, and we were greeted again by the friends we'd just embraced.　　There was time to talk now, to laugh.　　"Congrats, guys," Seth Clearwater told us, ducking his head under the edge of a flower garland. Hismother, Sue, was tight by his side, eyeing the guests with wary intensity. Her face was thin and fierce, anexpression that was accented by her short, severe hairstyle; it was as short as her daughter Leah's—Iwondered if she'd cut it the same way in a show of solidarity. Billy Black, on Seth's other side, was notas tense as Sue.　　When I looked at Jacob's father, I always felt like I was seeing two people rather than just one. Therewas the old man in the wheelchair with the lined face and the white smile that everyone else saw. Andthen there was the direct descendant of a long line of powerful, magical chieftains, cloaked in theauthority he'd been born with. Though the magic had—in the absence of a catalyst—skipped hisgeneration, Billy was still a part of the power and the legend. It flowed straight through him. It flowed tohis son, the heir to the magic, who had turned his back on it. That left Sam Uley to act as the chief oflegends and magic now___Billy seemed oddly at ease considering the company and the event—his black eyes sparkled like he'djust gotten some good news. I was impressed by his composure. This wedding must have seemed a verybad thing, the worst thing that could happen to his best friend's daughter, in Billy's eyes.　　I knew it wasn't easy for him to restrain his feelings, considering the challenge this event foreshadowed tothe ancient treaty between the Cullens and the Quileutes—the treaty that prohibited the Cullens from evercreating another vampire. The wolves knew a breach was coming, but the Cullens had no idea how theywould react. Before the alliance, it would have meant an immediate attack. A war. But now that theyknew each other better, would there be forgiveness instead?　　As if in response to that thought, Seth leaned toward Edward, arms extended. Edward returned the hugwith his free arm.　　I saw Sue shudder delicately.　　"It's good to see things work out for you, man," Seth said. "I'm happy for you.""Thank you, Seth. That means a lot to me." Edward pulled away from Seth and looked at Sue and Billy.　　"Thank you, as well. For letting Seth come. For supporting Bella today.""You're welcome," Billy said in his deep, gravelly voice, and I was surprised at the optimism in his tone.　　Perhaps a stronger truce was on the horizon.　　A bit of a line was forming, so Seth waved goodbye and wheeled Billy toward the food. Sue kept onehand on each of them.　　Angela and Ben were the next to claim us, followed by Angela's parents and then Mike and Jessica—who were, to my surprise, holding hands. I hadn't heard that they were together again. That was nice.　　Behind my human friends were my new cousins-in-law, the Denali vampire clan. I realized I was holdingmy breath as the vampire in front—Tanya, I assumed from the strawberry tint in her blondcurls—reached out to embrace Edward. Next to her, three other vampires with golden eyes stared at mewith open curiosity. One woman had long, pale blond hair, straight as corn silk. The other woman andthe man beside her were both black-haired, with a hint of an olive tone to their chalky complexions.　　And they were all four so beautiful that it made my stomach hurt.　　Tanya was still holding Edward.　　"Ah, Edward," she said. "I've missed you."Edward chuckled and deftly maneuvered out of the hug, placing his hand lightly on her shoulder andstepping back, as if to get a better look at her. "It's been too long, Tanya. You look well.""So do you.""Let me introduce you to my wife." It was the first time Edward had said that word since it was officiallytrue; he seemed like he would explode with satisfaction saying it now. The Denalis all laughed lightly inresponse. "Tanya, this is my Bella."Tanya was every bit as lovely as my worst nightmares had predicted. She eyed me with a look that wasmuch more speculative than it was resigned, and then reached out to take my hand.　　"Welcome to the family, Bella." She smiled, a little rueful. "We consider ourselves Carlisle's extendedfamily, and I am sorry about the, er, recent incident when we did not behave as such. We should havemet you sooner. Canyou forgive us?""Of course," I said breathlessly. "It's so nice to meet you.""The Cullens are all evened up in numbers now. Perhaps it will be our turn next, eh, Kate?" She grinnedat the blonde.　　"Keep the dream alive," Kate said with a roll of her golden eyes. She took my hand from Tanya's andsqueezed it gently. "Welcome, Bella."The dark-haired woman put her hand on top of Kate's. "I'm Carmen, this is Eleazar. We're all so verypleased to finally meet you.""M-me, too," I stuttered.　　Tanya glanced at the people waiting behind her—Charlie's deputy, Mark, and his wife. Their eyes werehuge as they took in the Denali clan.　　"We'll get to know each other later. We'll have eons of time for that!" Tanya laughed as she and herfamily moved on.　　All the standard traditions were kept. I was blinded by flashbulbs as we held the knife over a spectacularcake—too grand, I thought, for our relatively intimate group of friends and family. We took turns shovingcake in each other's faces; Edward manfully swallowed his portion as I watched in disbelief. I threw mybouquet with atypical skill, right into Angela's surprised hands. Emmett and Jasper howled with laughterat my blush while Edward removed my borrowed garter—which I'd shimmied down nearly to myankle— verycarefully with his teeth. With a quick wink at me, he shot it straight into Mike Newton'sface.　　And when the music started, Edward pulled me into his arms for the customary first dance; I wentwillingly, despite my fear of dancing—especially dancing in front of an audience—just happy to have himholding me. He did all the work, and I twirled effortlessly under the glow of a canopy of lights and thebright flashes from the cameras.　　"Enjoying the party, Mrs. Cullen?" he whispered in my ear.　　I laughed. "That will take a while to get used to.""We have a while," he reminded me, his voice exultant, and he leaned down to kiss me while we danced.　　Cameras clicked feverishly.　　The music changed, and Charlie tapped on Edward's shoulder.　　It wasn't nearly as easy to dance with Charlie. He was no better at it than I was, so we moved safelyfrom side to side in a tiny square formation. Edward and Esme spun around us like Fred Astaire andGinger Rogers.　　"I'm going to miss you at home, Bella. I'm already lonely."I spoke through a tight throat, trying to make a joke of it. "I feel just horrible, leaving you to cook foryourself—it's practically criminal negligence. You could arrest me."He grinned. "I suppose I'll survive the food. Just call me whenever you can.""I promise."It seemed like I danced with everyone. It was good to see all my old friends, but I really wanted to bewith Edwardmore than anything else. I was happy when he finally cut in, just half a minute after a new dance started.　　"Still not that fond of Mike, eh?" I commented as Edward whirled me away from him.　　"Not when I have to listen to his thoughts. He's lucky I didn't kick him out. Or worse.""Yeah, right.""Have you had a chance to look at yourself?""Urn. No, I guess not. Why?""Then I suppose you don't realize how utterly, heart-breakingly beautiful you are tonight. I'm notsurprised Mike's having difficulty with improper thoughts about a married woman. I am disappointed thatAlice didn't make sure you were forced to look in a mirror.""You are very biased, you know."He sighed and then paused and turned me around to face the house. The wall of glass reflected the partyback like a long mirror. Edward pointed to the couple in the mirror directly across from us.　　"Biased, am I?"I caught just a glimpse of Edward's reflection—a perfect duplicate of his perfect face—with adark-haired beauty at his side. Her skin was cream and roses, her eyes were huge with excitement andframed with thick lashes. The narrow sheath of the shimmering white dress flared out subtly at the trainalmost like an inverted calla lily, cut so skillfully that her body looked elegant and graceful—while it wasmotionless, at least.　　Before I could blink and make the beauty turn back into me, Edward suddenly stiffened and turnedautomatically in the other direction, as if someone had called his name.　　"Oh!" he said. His brow furrowed for an instant and then smoothed out just as quickly.　　Suddenly, he was smiling a brilliant smile.　　"What is it?" I asked.　　"A surprise wedding gift.""Huh?"He didn't answer; he just started dancing again, spinning me the opposite way we'd been headed before,away from the lights and then into the deep swath of night that ringed the luminous dance floor.　　He didn't pause until we reached the dark side of one of the huge cedars. Then Edward looked straightinto the blackest shadow.　　"Thank you," Edward said to the darkness. "This is very... kind of you.""Kind is my middle name," a husky familiar voice answered from the black night. "Can i cut in?"My hand flew up to my throat, and if Edward hadn't been holding me I would have collapsed.　　"Jacob!" I choked as soon as I could breathe. "Jacob!""Hey there, Bells."I stumbled toward the sound of his voice. Edward kept his grip under my elbow until another set ofstrong hands caught me in the darkness. The heat from Jacob's skin burned right through the thin satindress as he pulled meclose. He made no effort to dance; he just hugged me while I buried my face in his chest. He leaneddown to press his cheek to the top of my head.　　"Rosalie won't forgive me if she doesn't get her official turn on the dance floor," Edward murmured, andI knew he was leaving us, giving me a gift of his own—this moment with Jacob.　　"Oh, Jacob." I was crying now; I couldn't get the words out clearly. "Thank you.""Stop blubbering,Bella. You'll ruin your dress. It's just me.""Just? Oh, Jake! Everything is perfect now."Hesnorted. "Yeah—the party can start. The best man finally made it.""Now everyone I love is here."I felthis lips brush my hair. "SorryI'm late, honey.""I'm just so happy you came!""That was the idea."I glanced toward the guests, but I couldn't see through the dancers to the spot where I'd last seenJacob's father. I didn't know if he'd stayed. "DoesBilly know you're here?" As soon as I asked, I knewthat he must have—it was the only way to explain his uplifted expression before.　　"I'm sure Sam's told him. I'll go see him when... when the party's over.""He'll beso glad you're home."Jacob pulled back a little bit and straightened up.He left one hand on the small of my back and grabbedmy right hand with the other. He cradled our hands to his chest; I could feel his heart beat under mypalm, and I guessed that he hadn't placed my hand there accidentally.　　"I don't know if I get more than just this one dance," he said, and he began pulling me around in a slowcircle that didn't match the tempo of the music coming from behind us. "I'd better make the best of it."We moved to the rhythm of his heart under my hand.　　"I'm glad Icame," Jacob said quietly after a moment. "I didn't think I would be. But it's good to see you...　　one more time. Not as sad as I'd thought it would be.""I don't want you to feel sad.""I know that. And I didn't come tonight to make you feel guilty.""No—it makes me very happy that you came. It's the best gift you could have given me."He laughed. "That's good, because I didn't have time to stop for a real present."My eyes were adjusting, and I could see his face now, higher up than I expected. Was it possible that hewas still growing? He had to be closer to seven feet than to six. It was a relief to see his familiar featuresagain after all this time—his deep-set eyes shadowed under his shaggy black brows, his highcheekbones, his full lips stretched over his bright teeth in the sarcastic smile that matched his tone. Hiseyes were tight around the edges—careful; I could see that he was being very careful tonight. He wasdoing all he could to make me happy, to not slip and show how much this cost him.　　I'd never done anything good enough to deserve a friend like Jacob.　　"When did you decide to come back?""Consciously or subconsciously?" He took a deep breath before he answered his own question. "I don'treally know. I guess I've been wandering back this direction for a while, and maybe it's because I washeaded here. But it wasn't until this morning that I really started running. I didn't know if I could makeit." He laughed. "You wouldn't believe how weird this feels—walking around on two legs again. Andclothes! And then it's more bizarre because it feels weird. I didn't expect that. I'm out of practice with thewhole human thing."We revolved steadily.　　"It would have been a shame to miss seeing you like this, though. That's worth the trip right there. Youlook unbelievable, Bella. So beautiful.""Alice invested a lot of time in me today. The dark helps, too.""It's not so dark for me, you know.""Right." Werewolf senses. It was easy to forget all the things he could do, he seemed so human.　　Especially right now.　　"You cut your hair," I noted.　　"Yeah. Easier, you know. Thought I'd better take advantage of the hands.""It looks good," I lied.　　He snorted. "Right. I did it myself, with rusty kitchen shears." He grinned widely for a moment, and thenhis smile faded. His expression turned serious. "Are you happy, Bella?""Yes.""Okay." I felt his shoulders shrug. "That's the main thing, I guess.""How are you, Jacob? Really?""I'm fine, Bella, really. You don't need to worry about me anymore. You can stop bugging Seth.""I'm not just bugging him because of you. I like Seth.""He's a good kid. Better company than some. I tell you, if I could get rid of the voices in my head, beinga wolf would be about perfect."I laughed at the way it sounded. "Yeah, I can't get mine to shut up, either.""In your case, that would mean you're insane. Of course, I already knew that you were insane," heteased.　　"Thanks.""Insanity is probably easier than sharing a pack mind. Crazy people's voices don't send babysitters towatch them.""Huh?""Sam's out there. And some of the others. Just in case, you know.""In case of what?""In case I can't keep it together, something like that. In case I decide to trash the party." He flashed aquicksmile at what was probably an appealing thought to him. "But I'm not here to ruin your wedding, Bella.　　I'm here to .. ." He trailed off.　　"To make it perfect.""That's a tall order.""Good thing you're so tall."He groaned at my bad joke and then sighed. "I'm just here to be your friend. Your best friend, one lasttime.""Sam should give you more credit.""Well, maybe I'm being oversensitive. Maybe they'd be here anyway, to keep an eye on Seth. There area lot of vampires here. Seth doesn't take that as seriously as he should.""Seth knows that he's not in any danger. He understands the Cullens better than Sam does.""Sure, sure," Jacob said, making peace before it could turn into a fight.　　It was strange to have him being the diplomat.　　"Sorry about those voices," I said. "Wish I could make it better." In so many ways.　　"It's not that bad. I'm just whining a little.""You're... happy?""Close enough. But enough about me. You're the star today." He chuckled. "I bet you're just lovingthat. Center of attention.""Yeah. Can't get enough attention."He laughed and then stared over my head. With pursed lips, he studied the shimmering glow of thereception party, the graceful whirl of the dancers, the fluttering petals falling from the garlands; I lookedwith him. It all seemed very distant from this black, quiet space. Almost like watching the white flurriesswirling inside a snow globe.　　"I'll give them this much," he said. "They know how to throw a party.""Alice is an unstoppable force of nature."He sighed. "Song's over. Do you think 1 get another one? Or is that asking too much?"I tightened my hand around his. "You can have as many dances as you want."He laughed. "That would be interesting. I think I'd better stick with two, though. Don't want to starttalk."We turned in another circle.　　"You'd think I'd be used to telling you goodbye by now," he murmured.　　I tried to swallow the lump in my throat, but I couldn't force it down.　　Jacob looked at me and frowned. He wiped his fingers across my cheek, catching the tears there.　　"You're not supposed to be the one crying, Bella.""Everyone cries at weddings," I said thickly.　　"This is what you want, right?""Right.""Then smile."I tried. He laughed at my grimace.　　Tm going to try to remember you like this. Pretend that...""That what?That I died?"He clenched his teeth. He was struggling with himself—with his decision to make his presence here a giftand not a judgment. I could guess what he wanted to say.　　"No," he finally answered. "But I'll see you this way in my head. Pink cheeks. Heartbeat. Two left feet.　　All of that."I deliberately stomped on his foot as hard as I could.　　He smiled. "That's my girl."He started to say something else and then snapped his mouth closed. Struggling again, teeth grittedagainst the words he didn't want to say.　　My relationship with Jacob used to be so easy. Natural as breathing. But since Edward had come backinto my life, it was a constant strain. Because—in Jacob's eyes—by choosing Edward, I was choosing afate that was worse than death, or at least equivalent to it.　　"What is it, Jake? Just tell me. You can tell me anything.""I—I... I don't have anything to tell you.""Oh please. Spit it out.""It's true.It's not... it's—it's a question. It's something I want you to tell me""Ask me."He struggled for another minute and then exhaled. "I shouldn't. It doesn't matter. I'm just morbidlycurious."Because I knew him so well, I understood.　　"It's not tonight, Jacob," I whispered.　　Jacob was even more obsessed with my humanity than Edward. He treasured every one of myheartbeats, knowing that they were numbered.　　"Oh," he said, trying to smother his relief. "Oh."A new song started playing, but he didn't notice the change this time.　　"When?" he whispered.　　"I don't know for sure. A week or two, maybe."His voice changed, took on a defensive, mocking edge. "What's the holdup?""I just didn't want to spend my honeymoon writhing in pain.""You'd rather spend it how? Playing checkers? Ha ha.""Very funny.""Kidding, Bells. But, honestly, I don't see the point. You can't have a real honeymoon with yourvampire, so why go through the motions? Call a spade a spade. This isn't the first time you've put this off.　　That's a good thing, though," he said, suddenly earnest. "Don't be embarrassed about it.""I'm not putting anything off," I snapped. "And yes I can have a real honeymoon! I can do anything Iwant! Butt out!"He stopped our slow circling abruptly. For a moment, I wondered if he'd finally noticed the musicchange, and I scrambled in my head for a way to patch up our little tiff before he said goodbye to me.　　We shouldn't part on this note.　　And then his eyes bulged wide with a strange kind of confused horror.　　"What?" he gasped. "What did you say?""About what... ? Jake? What's wrong?""What do you mean? Have a real honeymoon? While you're still human? Are you kidding? That's a sickjoke, Bella!"I glared at him. "I said butt out, Jake. This is so not your business. I shouldn't have... we shouldn't evenbe talking about this. It's private—"His enormous hands gripped the tops of my arms, wrapping all the way around, fingers overlapping.　　"Ow, Jake! Let go!"He shook me.　　"Bella! Have you lost your mind? You can't be that stupid! Tell me you're joking!"He shook me again. His hands, tight as tourniquets, were quivering, sending vibrations deep into mybones.　　"Jake—stop!"The darkness was suddenly very crowded.　　"Take your hands off her!" Edward's voice was cold as ice, sharp as razors.　　Behind Jacob, there was a low snarl from the black night, and then another, overlapping the first.　　"Jake, bro, back away," I heard Seth Clearwater urge. "You're losing it."Jacob seemed frozen as he was, his horrified eyes wide and staring.　　"You'll hurt her," Seth whispered. "Let her go.""Now!" Edward snarled.　　Jacob's hands dropped to his sides, and the sudden gush of blood through my waiting veins was almostpainful. Before I could register more than that, cold hands replaced the hot ones, and the air wassuddenly whooshing past me.　　I blinked, and I was on my feet a half dozen feet away from where I'd been standing. Edward wastensed in front of me. There were two enormous wolves braced between him and Jacob, but they did notseem aggressive to me. More like they were trying to prevent the fight.　　And Seth—gangly, fifteen-year-old Seth—had his long arms around Jacob's shaking body, and he wastugging him away. If Jacob phased with Seth so close...　　"C'mon, Jake. Let's go.""I'll kill you," Jacob said, his voice so choked with rage that it was low as a whisper. His eyes, focusedonEdward, burned with fury. "I'll kill you myself! I'll do it now!" He shuddered convulsively.　　The biggest wolf, the black one, growled sharply.　　"Seth, get out of the way," Edward hissed.　　Seth tugged on Jacob again. Jacob was so bewildered with rage that Seth was able to yank him a fewfeet farther back. "Don't do it, Jake. Walk away. C'mon."Sam—the bigger wolf, the black one—joined Seth then. He put his massive head against Jacob's chestand shoved.　　The three of them—Seth towing, Jake trembling, Sam pushing—disappeared swiftly into the darkness.　　The other wolf stared after them. I wasn't sure, in the weak light, about the color of his fur—chocolatebrown, maybe? Was it Quil, then?　　Tm sorry," I whispered to the wolf.　　"It'sall right now,Bella," Edward murmured.　　The wolf looked at Edward. His gaze was not friendly. Edward gave him one cold nod.The wolf huffedand then turned to follow the others, vanishing as they had.　　"All right," Edward said to himself, and then he looked at me. "Let's get back.""But Jake—""Sam has him in hand. He's gone.""Edward, I'm so sorry. Iwas stupid—""You did nothing wrong—""I have such a big mouth! Why would I... I shouldn't have let him get to me like that. What was Ithinking?""Don't worry." He touched my face. "We need to get back to the reception before someone notices ourabsence."I shook my head, trying to reorient myself. Before someone noticed? Had anyone missed that?　　Then, as I thought about it, I realized the confrontation that had seemed so catastrophic to me had, inreality, been very quiet and short here in the shadows.　　"Give me two seconds," I pleaded.　　My insides were chaotic with panic and grief, but that didn't matter—only the outside mattered rightnow. Putting on a good show was something I knew I had to master.　　"My dress?""You look fine. Not a hair out of place."I took two deep breaths. "Okay. Let's go."He put his arms around me and led me back to the light. When we passed under the twinkle lights, hespun me gently onto the dance floor. We melted in with the other dancers as if our dance had never beeninterrupted.　　I glanced around at the guests, butno one seemed shocked or frightened. Only the very palest facesthere showed any signs of stress, and they hid it well. Jasper and Emmett were on the edge of the floor,close together,and I guessed that they had been nearby during the confrontation.　　"Are you—"Tm fine," I promised. "I can't believe I did that. What's wrong with me?""Nothing is wrong with you"I'd been so glad to see Jacob here. I knew the sacrifice it had taken him. And then I'd ruined it, turnedhis gift into a disaster. I should be quarantined.　　But my idiocy would not ruin anything else tonight. I would put this away, shove it in a drawer and lock itup to deal with later. There would be plenty of time to flagellate myself for this, and nothing I could donow would help.　　"It's over," I said. "Let's not think of it again tonight."I expected a quick agreement from Edward, but he was silent.　　"Edward?"He closed his eyes and touched his forehead to mine. "Jacob is right," he whispered. "What am Ithinking?""He is not." I tried to keep my face smooth for the watching crowd of friends. "Jacob is way tooprejudiced to see anything clearly."He mumbled something low that sounded almost like "should let him kill me for even thinking ...""Stop it," I said fiercely. I grabbed his face in my hands and waited until he opened his eyes. "You andme. That's the only thing that matters. The only thing you're allowed to think about now. Do you hearme?""Yes," he sighed.　　"Forget Jacob came." I could do that. I would 60 that. "For me. Promise that you'll let this go."He stared into my eyes for a moment before answering. "I promise.""Thank you. Edward, I'm not afraid.""I am," he whispered.　　"Don't be." I took deep breath and smiled. "By the way, I love you."He smiled just a little in return. "That's why we're here.""You're monopolizing the bride," Emmett said, coming up behind Edward's shoulder. "Let me dance withmy little sister. This could be my last chance to make her blush." He laughed loudly, as unaffected as heusually was by any serious atmosphere.　　It turned out there were actually lots of people I hadn't danced with yet, and that gave me a chance totruly compose and resolve myself. When Edward claimed me again, I found that the Jacob-drawer wasshut nice and tight. As he wrapped his arms around me, I was able to unearth my earlier sense of joy, mycertainty that everything in my life was in the right place tonight. I smiled and laid my head against hischest. His arms tightened.　　"I could get used to this," I said.　　"Don't tell me you've gotten over your dancing issues?""Dancing isn't so bad—with you. But I was thinking more of this,"—and I pressed myself to him eventighter—"of never having to let you go.""Never," he promised, and he leaned down to kiss me.　　It was a serious kind of kiss—intense, slow but building....　　I'd pretty much forgotten where I was when I heard Alice call, "Bella! It's time!"I felt a brief flicker of irritation with my new sister for the interruption.　　Edward ignored her; his lips were hard against mine, more urgent than before. My heart broke into asprint and my palms were slick against his marble neck.　　"Do you want to miss your plane?" Alice demanded, right next to me now. "I'm sure you'll have a lovelyhoneymoon camped out in the airport waiting for another flight."Edward turned his face slightly to murmur, "Go away, Alice," and then pressed his lips to mine again.　　"Bella, do you want to wear that dress on the airplane?" she demanded.　　I wasn't really paying much attention. At the moment, I simply didn't care.　　Alice growled quietly. "I'll tell her where you're taking her, Edward. So help me, I will."He froze. Then he lifted his face from mine and glared at his favorite sister. "You're awfully small to be sohugelyirritating.""I didn't pick out the perfect going-away dress to have it wasted," she snapped back, taking my hand.　　"Come with me, Bella."I tugged against her hold, stretching up on my toes to kiss him one more time. She jerked my armimpatiently, hauling me away from him. There were a few chuckles from the watching guests. I gave upthen and let her lead me into the empty house.　　She looked annoyed.　　"Sorry, Alice," I apologized.　　"I don't blame you, Bella." She sighed. "You don't seem to be able help yourself."I giggled at her martyred expression, and she scowled.　　"Thank you, Alice. It was the most beautiful wedding anyone ever had," I told her earnestly. "Everythingwas exactly right. You're the best, smartest, most talented sister in the whole world."That thawed her out; she smiled a huge smile. "I'm glad you liked it."Renee and Esme were waiting upstairs. The three of them quickly had me out of my dress and intoAlice's deep blue going-away ensemble. I was grateful when someone pulled the pins out of my hair andlet it fall loose down my back, wavy from the braids, saving me from a hairpin headache later. Mymother's tears streamed without a break the entire time.　　"I'll call you when I know where I'm going," I promised as I hugged her goodbye. I knew thehoneymoon secret was probably driving her crazy; my mother hated secrets, unless she was in on them.　　"I'll tell you as soon as she's safely away," Alice outdid me, smirking at my wounded expression. Howunfair, for me to be the last to know.　　"You have to visit me and Phil very, very soon. It's your turn to go south—see the sun for once," Reneesaid.　　"It didn't rain today," I reminded her, avoiding her request"A miracle.""Everything's ready," Alice said. "Your suitcases are in the car—Jasper's bringing it around." She pulledme back toward the stairs with Renee following, still halfway embracing me.　　"I love you, Mom," I whispered as we descended. Tm so glad you have Phil. Take care of each other.""I love you, too, Bella, honey.""Goodbye, Mom. I love you," I said again, my throat thick.　　Edward was waiting at the bottom of the stairs. I took his outstretched hand but leaned away, scanningthe little crowd that was waiting to see us off.　　"Dad?" I asked, my eyes searching.　　"Over here," Edward murmured. He pulled me through the guests; they made a pathway for us. Wefound Charlie leaning awkwardly against the wall behind everyone else, looking a little like he was hiding.　　The red rims around his eyes explained why.　　"Oh, Dad!"I hugged him around the waist, tears streaming again—I was crying so much tonight. He patted myback.　　"There, now. You don't want to miss your plane."It was hard to talk about love with Charlie—we were so much alike, always reverting to trivial things toavoid embarrassing emotional displays. But this was no time for being self-conscious.　　"I love you forever, Dad," I told him. "Don't forget that.""You, too, Bells. Always have, always will."I kissed his cheek at the same time that he kissed mine.　　"Call me," he said.　　"Soon," I promised, knowing this was all I could promise. Just a phone call. My father and my mothercould not be allowed to see me again; I would be too different, and much, much too dangerous.　　"Go on, then," he said gruffly. "Don't want to be late."The guests made another aisle for us. Edward pulled me close to his side as we made our escape.　　"Are you ready?" he asked.　　"I am," I said, and I knew that it was true.　　Everyone applauded when Edward kissed me on the doorstep. Then he rushed me to the car as the ricestorm began. Most of it went wide, but someone, probably Emmett, threw with uncanny precision, and Icaught a lot of the ricochets off Edward's back.　　The car was decorated with more flowers that trailed in streamers along its length, and long gossamerribbons that were tied to a dozen shoes—designer shoes that looked brand-new—dangling behind thebumper.　　Edward shielded me from the rice while I climbed in, and then he was in and we were speeding away asI waved out the window and called "I love you" to the porch, where my families waved back.　　The last image I registered was one of my parents. Phil had both arms wrapped tenderly around Renee.　　She had one arm tight around his waist but had her free hand reached out to hold Charlie's. So manydifferent kinds of love, harmonious in this one moment. It seemed a very hopeful picture to me.　　Edward squeezed my hand.　　"I love you," he said.　　I leaned my head against his arm. 'That's why we're here," I quoted him.　　He kissed my hair.　　As we turned onto the black highway and Edward really hit the accelerator, I heard a noise over thepurr of the engine, coming from the forest behind us. If I could hear it, then he certainly could. But he saidnothing as the sound slowly faded in the distance. I said nothing, either.　　The piercing, heartbroken howling grew fainter and then disappeared entirely.
    Chapter 5 Isle Esme
    "Houston?" I asked, raising my eyebrows when we reached the gate in Seattle.　　"Just a stop along the way," Edward assured me with a grin.　　It felt like I'd barely fallen asleep when he woke me. I was groggy as he pulled me through the terminals,struggling to remember how to open my eyes after every blink. It took me a few minutes to catch up withwhat was going on when we stopped at the international counter to check in for our next flight.　　"Rio de Janeiro?" I asked with slightly more trepidation.　　"Another stop," he told me.　　The flight to South America was long but comfortable in the wide first-class seat, with Edward's armscradled around me. I slept myself out and awoke unusually alert as we circled toward the airport with thelight of the setting sun slanting through the plane's windows.　　We didn't stay in the airport to connect with another flight as I'd expected. Instead we took a taxithrough the dark, teeming, living streets of Rio. Unable to understand a word of Edward's Portugueseinstructions to the driver, I guessed that we were off to find a hotel before the next leg of our journey. Asharp twinge of something very close to stage fright twisted in the pit of my stomach as I considered that.　　The taxi continued through the swarming crowds until they thinned somewhat, and we appeared to benearing the extreme western edge of the city, heading into the ocean.　　We stopped at the docks.　　Edward led the way down the long line of white yachts moored in the night-blackened water. The boathe stopped at was smaller than the others, sleeker, obviously built for speed instead of space. Stillluxurious, though, and more graceful than the rest. He leaped in lightly, despite the heavy bags he carried.　　He dropped those on the deck and turned to help me carefully over the edge.　　I watched in silence while he prepared the boat for departure, surprised at how skilled and comfortablehe seemed, because he'd never mentioned an interest in boating before. But then again, he was good atjust about everything.　　As we headed due east into the open ocean, I reviewed basic geography in my head. As far as I couldremember, there wasn't much east of Brazil... until you got to Africa.　　But Edward sped forward while the lights of Rio faded and ultimately disappeared behind us. On hisface was a familiar exhilarated smile, the one produced by any form of speed. The boat plunged throughthe waves and I was showered with sea spray.　　Finally the curiosity I'd suppressed so long got the best of me.　　"Are we going much farther?" I asked.　　It wasn't like him to forget that I was human, but I wondered if he planned for us to live on this smallcraft for any length of time.　　"About another half hour." His eyes took in my hands, clenched on the seat, and he grinned.　　Oh well, I thought to myself. He was a vampire, after all. Maybe we were going to Atlantis.　　Twenty minutes later, he called my name over the roar of the engine.　　"Bella, look there." He pointed straight ahead.　　I saw only blackness at first, and the moon's white trail across the water. But I searched the spacewhere he pointed until I found a low black shape breaking into the sheen of moonlight on the waves. As Isquinted into the darkness, the silhouette became more detailed. The shape grew into a squat, irregulartriangle, with one side trailing longer than the other before sinking into the waves. We drew closer, and Icould see the outline was feathery, swaying to the light breeze.　　And then my eyes refocused and the pieces all made sense: a small island rose out of the water ahead ofus, waving with palm fronds, a beach glowing pale in the light of the moon.　　"Where are we?" I murmured in wonder while he shifted course, heading around to the north end of theisland.　　He heard me, despite the noise of the engine, and smiled a wide smile that gleamed in the moonlight.　　"This is Isle Esme."The boat slowed dramatically, drawing with precision into position against a short dock constructed ofwooden planks, bleached into whiteness by the moon. The engine cut off, and the silence that followedwas profound. There was nothing but the waves, slapping lightly against the boat, and the rustle of thebreeze in the palms. The air was warm, moist, and fragrant—like the steam left behind after a hotshower.　　"Isle Esme?" My voice was low, but it still sounded too loud as it broke into the quiet night.　　"A gift from Carlisle—Esme offered to let us borrow it."A gift. Who gives an island as a gift? I frowned. I hadn't realized that Edward's extreme generosity was alearned behavior.　　He placed the suitcases on the dock and then turned back, smiling his perfect smile as he reached forme.　　Instead of taking my hand, he pulled me right up into his arms.　　"Aren't you supposed to wait for the threshold?'71 asked, breathless, as he sprung lightly out of theboat.　　He grinned. "I'm nothing if not thorough."Gripping the handles of both huge steamer trunks in one hand and cradling me in the other arm, hecarried me up the dock and onto a pale sand pathway through the dark vegetation.　　For a short while it was pitch black in the jungle-like growth, and then I could see a warm light ahead. Itwas about at the point when I realized the light was a house—the two bright, perfect squares were widewindows framing a front door—that the stage fright attacked again, more forcefully than before, worsethan when I'd thought we were headed for a hotel.　　My heart thudded audibly against my ribs, and my breath seemed to get stuck in my throat. I feltEdward's eyes on my face, but I refused to meet his gaze. I stared straight ahead, seeing nothing.　　He didn't ask what I was thinking, which was out of character for him. I guessed that meant that he wasjust as nervous as I suddenly was.　　He set the suitcases on the deep porch to open the doors—they were unlocked.　　Edward looked down at me, waiting until I met his gaze before he stepped through the threshold.　　He carried me through the house, both of us very quiet, flipping on lights as he went. My vagueimpression of the house was that it was quite large for a tiny island, and oddly familiar. I'd gotten used tothe pale-on-pale color scheme preferred by the Cullens; it felt like home. I couldn't focus on anyspecifics, though. The violent pulse beating behind my ears made everything a little blurry.　　Then Edward stopped and turned on the last light.　　The room was big and white, and the far wall was mostly glass—standard decor for my vampires.　　Outside, the moon was bright on white sand and, just a few yards away from the house, glistening waves.　　But I barely noted that part. I was more focused on the absolutely huge white bed in the center of theroom, hung with billowy clouds of mosquito netting.　　Edward set me on my feet.　　"I'll... go get the luggage."The room was too warm, stuffier than the tropical night outside. A bead of sweat dewed up on the napeof my neck. I walked slowly forward until I could reach out and touch the foamy netting. For somereason I felt the need to make sure everything was real.　　I didn't hear Edward return. Suddenly, his wintry finger caressed the back of my neck, wiping away thedrop of perspiration.　　"It's a little hot here," he said apologetically. "I thought... that would be best.""Thorough," I murmured under my breath, and he chuckled. It was a nervous sound, rare for Edward.　　"I tried to think of everything that would make this... easier," he admitted.　　I swallowed loudly, still facing away from him. Had there ever been a honeymoon like this before?　　I knew the answer to that. No. There had not.　　"I was wondering,'7Edward said slowly, "if... first... maybe you'd like to take a midnight swim with me?"He took a deep breath, and his voice was more at ease when he spoke again. "The water will be verywarm. This is the kind of beach you approve of.""Sounds nice." My voice broke.　　"I'm sure you'd like a human minute or two.... It was a long journey."I nodded woodenly. I felt barely human; maybe a few minutes alone would help.　　His lips brushed against my throat, just below my ear. He chuckled once and his cool breath tickled myoverheated skin. "Don't take too long, Mrs. Cullen."I jumped a little at the sound of my new name.　　His lips brushed down my neck to the tip of my shoulder. "I'll wait for you in the water."He walked past me to the French door that opened right onto the beach sand. On the way, he shruggedout of his shirt, dropping it on the floor, and then slipped through the door into the moonlit night. Thesultry, salty air swirled into the room behind him.　　Did my skin burst into flames? I had to look down to check. Nope, nothing was burning. At least, notvisibly.　　I reminded myself to breathe, and then I stumbled toward the giant suitcase that Edward had opened ontop of a low white dresser. It must be mine, because my familiar bag of toiletries was right on top, andthere was a lot of pink in there, but I didn't recognize even one article of clothing. As I pawed through theneatly folded piles—looking for something familiar and comfortable, a pair of old sweats maybe—it cameto my attention that there was an awful lot of sheer lace and skimpy satin in my hands. Lingerie. Verylingerie-ish lingerie, with French tags.　　I didn't know how or when, but someday, Alice was going to pay for this.　　Giving up, I went to the bathroom and peeked out through the long windows that opened to the samebeach as the French doors. I couldn't see him; I guessed he was there in the water, not bothering tocome up for air. In the sky above, the moon was lopsided, almost full, and the sand was bright whiteunder its shine. A small movement caught my eye—draped over a bend in one of the palm trees thatfringed the beach, the rest of his clothes were swaying in the light breeze.　　A rush of heat flashed across my skin again.　　I took a couple of deep breaths and then went to the mirrors above the long stretch of counters. Ilooked exactly like I'd been sleeping on a plane all day. I found my brush and yanked it harshly throughthe snarls on the back of my neck until they were smoothed out and the bristles were full of hair. Ibrushed my teeth meticulously, twice. Then I washed my face and splashed water on the back of myneck, which was feeling feverish. That felt so good that I washed my arms as well, and finally I decidedto just give up and take the shower. I knew it was ridiculous to shower before swimming, but I needed tocalm down, and hot water was one reliable way to do that.　　Also, shaving my legs again seemed like a pretty good idea.　　When I was done, I grabbed a huge white towel off the counter and wrapped it under my arms.　　Then I was faced with a dilemma I hadn't considered. What was I supposed to put on? Not a swimsuit,obviously. But it seemed silly to put my clothes back on, too. I didn't even want to think about the thingsAlice had packed for me.　　My breathing started to accelerate again and my hands trembled—so much for the calming effects of theshower. I started to feel a little dizzy, apparently a full-scale panic attack on the way. I sat down on thecool tile floor in my big towel and put my head between my knees. I prayed he wouldn't decide to comelook for me before I could pull myself together. I could imagine what he would think if he saw me goingto pieces this way. It wouldn't be hard for him to convince himself that we were making a mistake.　　And I wasn't freaking out because I thought we were making a mistake. Not atall. I was freaking outbecause I had no idea how to do this, and I was afraid to walk out of this room and face the unknown.　　Especially in French lingerie. I knew I wasn't ready for that yetThis felt exactly like having to walk out in front of a theater full of thousands with no idea what my lineswere.　　How did people do this—swallowall their fears and trust someone else so implicitly with everyimperfection and fear they had—with less than the absolute commitment Edward had given me? if itweren't Edward out there, if I didn't know in every cell of my body that he loved me as much as I lovedhim—unconditionally and irrevocably and, to be honest, irrationally—I'd never be able to get up off thisfloor.　　But it was Edward out there, so I whispered the words "Don't be a coward" under my breath andscrambled to my feet. I hitched the towel tighter under my arms and marched determinedly from thebathroom. Past the suitcase full of lace and the big bed without looking at either. Out the open glass dooronto the powder-fine sand.　　Everything was black-and-white, leached colorless by the moon. I walked slowly across the warmpowder, pausing beside the curved tree where he had left his clothes. I laid my hand against the roughbark and checked my breathing to make sure it was even. Or even enough.　　I looked across the low ripples, black in the darkness, searching for him.　　He wasn't hard to find. He stood, his back to me, waist deep in the midnight water, staring up at the ovalmoon. The pallid light of the moon turned his skin a perfect white, like the sand, like the moon itself, andmade his wet hair black as the ocean. He was motionless, his hands resting palms down against thewater; the low waves broke around him as if he were a stone. I stared at the smooth lines of his back, hisshoulders, his arms, his neck, theflawless shape of him....　　The fire was no longer a flash burn across my skin—it was slow and deep now; it smoldered away allmy awkwardness, my shy uncertainty. I slipped the towel off without hesitation, leaving it on the tree withhis clothes, and walked out into the white light; it made me pale as the snowy sand, too.　　I couldn't hear the sound of my footsteps as I walked to the water's edge, but I guessed that he could.　　Edward did not turn. I let the gentle swells break over my toes, and found that he'd been right about thetemperature—it was very warm, like bath water. I stepped in, walking carefully across the invisible oceanfloor, but my care was unnecessary; the sand continued perfectly smooth, sloping gently toward Edward.　　I waded through the weightlesscurrent till I was at his side, and then I placed my hand lightly over his cool hand lying on the water.　　"Beautiful," I said, looking up at the moon, too.　　"It's all right," he answered, unimpressed. He turned slowly to face me; little waves rolled away from hismovement and broke against my skin. His eyes looked silver in his ice-colored face. He twisted his handup so that he could twine our fingers beneath the surface of the water. It was warm enough that his coolskin did not raise goose bumps on mine.　　"But I wouldn't use the word beautiful" he continued. "Not with you standing here in comparison."I half-smiled, then raised my free hand—it didn't tremble now—and placed it over his heart. White onwhite; we matched, for once. He shuddered the tiniest bit at my warm touch. His breath came roughernow.　　"I promised we would try" he whispered, suddenly tense. "If... if I do something wrong, if I hurt you,you must tell me at once."I nodded solemnly, keeping my eyes on his. I took another step through the waves and leaned my headagainst his chest.　　"Don't be afraid," I murmured. "We belong together."I was abruptly overwhelmed by the truth of my own words. This moment was so perfect, so right, therewas no way to doubt it.　　His arms wrapped around me, holding me against him, summer and winter. It felt like every nerve endingin my body was a live wire.　　"Forever," he agreed, and then pulled us gently into deeper water.　　The sun, hot on the bare skin of my back, woke me in the morning. Late morning, maybe afternoon, Iwasn't sure. Everything besides the time was clear, though; I knew exactly where I was—the bright roomwith the big white bed, brilliant sunlight streaming through the open doors. The clouds of netting wouldsoften the shine.　　I didn't open my eyes. I was too happy to change anything, no matter how small. The only sounds werethe waves outside, our breathing, my heartbeat...　　I was comfortable, even with the baking sun. His cool skin was the perfect antidote to the heat. Lyingacross his wintry chest, his arms wound around me, felt very easy and natural. I wondered idly what I'dbeen so panicky about last night. My fears all seemed silly now.　　His fingers softly trailed down the contours of my spine, and I knew that he knew I was awake. I keptmy eyes shut and tightened my arms around his neck, holding myself closer to him.　　He didn't speak; his fingers moved up and down my back, barely touching it as he lightly traced patternson my skin.　　I would have been happy to lie here forever, to never disturb this moment, but my body had other ideas.　　I laughed at my impatient stomach. It seemed sort of prosaic to be hungry after all that had passed lastnight. Likebeing brought back down to earth from some great height.　　"What's funny?" he murmured, still stroking my back. The sound of his voice, serious and husky, broughtwith it a deluge of memories from the night, and I felt a blush color my face and neck.　　To answer his question, my stomach growled. I laughed again. "You just can't escape being human forvery long."I waited, but he did not laugh with me. Slowly, sinking through the many layers of bliss that clouded myhead, came the realization of a different atmosphere outside my own glowing sphere of happiness.　　I opened my eyes; the first thing I saw was the pale, almost silvery skin of his throat, the arc of his chinabove my face. His jaw was taut. I propped myself up on my elbow so I could see his face.　　He was staring at the frothy canopy above us, and he didn't look at me as I studied his grave features.　　His expression was a shock—it sent a physical jolt through my body.　　"Edward," I said, a strange little catch in my throat, "what is it? What's wrong?""You have to ask?" His voice was hard, cynical.　　My first instinct, the product of a lifetime of insecurities, was to wonder what I had done wrong. Ithought through everything that had happened, but I couldn't find any sour note in the memory. It had allbeen simpler than I'd expected; we'd fit together like corresponding pieces, made to match up. This hadgiven me a secret satisfaction—we were compatible physically, as well as all the other ways. Fire andice, somehow existing together without destroying each other. More proof that I belonged with him.　　I couldn't think of any part that would make him look like this—so severe and cold. What had I missed?　　His finger smoothed the worried lines on my forehead.　　"What are you thinking?" he whispered.　　"You're upset. I don't understand. Did I... ?" I couldn't finish.　　His eyes tightened. "How badly are you hurt, Bella? The truth—don't try to downplay it.""Hurt?" I repeated; my voice came out higher than usual because the word took me so by surprise.　　He raised one eyebrow, his lips a tight line.　　I made a quick assessment, stretching my body automatically, tensing and flexing my muscles. There wasstiffness, and a lot of soreness, too, it was true, but mostly there was the odd sensation that my bones allhad become unhinged at the joints, and I had changed halfway into the consistency of a jellyfish. It wasnot an unpleasant feeling.　　And then I was a little angry, because he was darkening this most perfect of all mornings with hispessimistic assumptions.　　"Why would you jump to that conclusion? I've never been better than I am now."His eyes closed. "Stop that.""Stop what?""Stop acting like I'm not a monster for having agreed to this.""Edward!'7I whispered, really upset now. He was pulling my bright memory through the darkness,staining it. "Don't ever say that."He didn't open his eyes; it was like he didn't want to see me.　　"Look at yourself, Bella. Then tell me I'm not a monster."Wounded, shocked, I followed his instruction unthinkingly and then gasped.　　What had happened to me? I couldn't make sense of the fluffy white snow that clung to my skin. I shookmy head, and a cascade of white drifted out of my hair.　　I pinched one soft white bit between my fingers. It was a piece of down.　　"Why am I covered in feathers?" I asked, confused.　　He exhaled impatiently. "I bit a pillow. Or two. That's not what I'm talking about.""You... bit a pillow? Why?""Look, Bella!" he almost growled. He took my hand—very gingerly—and stretched my arm out. "Lookat that"This time, I saw what he meant.　　Under the dusting of feathers, large purplish bruises were beginning to blossom across the pale skin ofmy arm. My eyes followed the trail they made up to my shoulder, and then down across my ribs. I pulledmy hand free to poke at a discoloration on my left forearm, watching it fade where I touched and thenreappear. It throbbed a little.　　So lightly that he was barely touching me, Edward placed his hand against the bruises on my arm, one ata time, matching his long fingers to the patterns.　　"Oh," I said.　　I tried to remember this—to remember pain—but I couldn't. I couldn't recall a moment when his holdhad been too tight, his hands too hard against me. I only remembered wanting him to hold me tighter, andbeing pleased when he did....　　"I'm... so sorry, Bella," he whispered while I stared at the bruises. "I knew better than this. I should nothave—" He made a low, revolted sound in the back of his throat. "I am more sorry than I can tell you."He threw his arm over his face and became perfectly still.　　I sat for one long moment in total astonishment, trying to come to terms—now that I understood it—withhis misery. It was so contrary to the way that I felt that it was difficult to process.　　Theshock wore off slowly, leaving nothing in its absence. Emptiness. My mind was blank. I couldn'tthink of what to say. How could I explain it to him in the right way? How could I make him as happy as Iwas—or as I had been, a moment ago?　　I touched his arm, and he didn't respond. I wrapped my fingers around his wrist and tried to pry his armoff his face, but I could have been yanking on a sculpture for all the good it did me.　　"Edward."He didn't move.　　"Edward?"Nothing. So, this would be a monologue, then.　　"I'mnot sorry, Edward. I'm... I can't even tell you. I'm so happy. That doesn't cover it. Don't be angry.　　Don't. I'm really f—""Do not say the word fine." His voice was ice cold. "If you value my sanity, do not say that you are fine.""But I am: I whispered.　　"Bella," he almost moaned. "Don't.""No. You don't, Edward."He moved his arm; his gold eyes watched me warily.　　"Don't ruin this," I told him. "I. Am. Happy.""I've already ruined this," he whispered.　　"Cut it out," I snapped.　　I heard his teeth grind together.　　"Ugh!" I groaned. "Why can't you just read my mind already? It's so inconvenient to be a mental mute!"His eyes widened a little bit, distracted in spite of himself.　　"That's a new one. You love that I can't read your mind.""Not today."He stared at me. "Why?"I threw my hands up in frustration, feeling an ache in my shoulder that I ignored. My palms fell backagainst his chest with a sharp smack. "Because all this angst would be completely unnecessary if youcould see how I feel right now! Or five minutes ago, anyway. I was perfectly happy. Totally andcompletely blissed out. Now—well, I'm sort of pissed, actually.""You should be angry at me.""Well, I am. Does that make you feel better?"He sighed. "No. I don't think anything could make me feel better now.""T/?af," I snapped. "That right there is why I'm angry. You are killing my buzz, Edward."He rolled his eyes and shook his head.　　I took a deep breath. I was feeling more of the soreness now, but it wasn't that bad. Sort of like the dayafter lifting weights. I'd done that with Renee during one of her fitness obsessions. Sixty-five lunges withten pounds in each hand. I couldn't walk the next day. This was not as painful as that had been by half.　　I swallowed my irritation and tried to make my voice soothing. "We knew this was going to be tricky. Ithought that was assumed. And then—well, it was a lot easier than I thought it would be. And this isreally nothing." I brushed my fingers along my arm. "I think for a first time, not knowing what to expect,we did amazing. With a little practice—"His expression was suddenly so livid that I broke off mid-sentence.　　"Assumed? Did you expect this, Bella? Were you anticipating that I would hurt you? Were you thinkingit would be worse? Do you consider the experiment a success because you can walk away from it? Nobroken bones—thatequals a victory?"I waited, letting him get it all out. Then I waited some more while his breathing went back to normal.　　When his eyes were calm, I answered, speaking with slow precision.　　"I didn't know what to expect—but I definitely did not expect how... how... just wonderful and perfect itwas." My voice dropped to a whisper, my eyes slipped from his face down to my hands. "I mean, I don'tknow how it was for you, but it was like that for me."A cool finger pulled my chin back up.　　"Is that what you're worried about?" he said through his teeth. "That I didn't enjoy myself?"My eyes stayed down. "I know it's not the same. You're not human. I just was trying to explain that, fora human, well, I can't imagine that life gets any better than that."He was quiet for so long that, finally, I had to look up. His face was softer now, thoughtful.　　"It seems that I have more to apologize for." He frowned. "I didn't dream that you would construe theway I feel about what I did to you to mean that last night wasn't... well, the best night of my existence.　　But I don't want to think of it that way, not when you were ..."My lips curved up a little at the edges. "Really? The best ever?" I asked in a small voice.　　He took my face between his hands, still introspective. "I spoke to Carlisle after you and I made ourbargain, hoping he could help me. Of course he warned me that this would be very dangerous for you."A shadow crossed his expression. "He had faith in me, though—faith I didn't deserve."I started to protest, and he put two fingers over my lips before I could comment.　　"I also asked him what / should expect. I didn't know what it would be for me... what with my being avampire." He smiled halfheartedly. "Carlisle told me it was a very powerful thing, like nothing else. Hetold me physical love was something I should not treat lightly. With our rarely changing temperaments,strong emotions can alter us in permanent ways. But he said I did not need to worry about that part—you had already altered me so completely." This time his smile was more genuine.　　"I spoke to my brothers, too. They told me it was a very great pleasure. Second only to drinking humanblood." A line creased his brow. "But I've tasted your blood, and there could be no blood more potentthan that... I don't think they were wrong, really. Just that it was different for us. Something more.""It was more. It was everything.""That doesn't change the fact that it was wrong. Even if it were possible that you really did feel that way.""What does that mean? Do you think I'm making this up? Why?""To ease my guilt. I can't ignore the evidence, Bella. Or your history of trying to let me off the hookwhen I make mistakes."I grabbed his chin and leaned forward so that our faces were inches apart. "You listen to me, EdwardCullen. I am not pretending anything for your sake, okay? I didn't even know there was a reason to makeyou feel better until you started being all miserable. I've never been so happy in all my life—I wasn't thishappy when you decided thatyou loved me more than you wanted to kill me, or the first morning I woke up and you were therewaiting for me.... Not when I heard your voice in the ballet studio"—he flinched at the old memory of myclose call with a hunting vampire, but I didn't pause—"or when you said i do' and I realized that,somehow, I get to keep you forever. Those are the happiest memories I have, and this is better than anyof it. So just deal with it."He touched the frown line between my eyebrows. Tm making you unhappy now. I don't want to dothat.""Then don't you be unhappy. That's the only thing that's wrong here."His eyes tightened, then he took a deep breath and nodded. "You're right. The past is past and I can'tdo anything to change it. There's no sense in letting my mood sour this time for you. HI do whatever I canto make you happy now."I examined his face suspiciously, and he gave me a serene smile.　　"Whatever makes me happy?"My stomach growled at the same time that I asked.　　"You're hungry," he said quickly. He was swiftly out of the bed, stirring up a cloud of feathers. Whichreminded me.　　"So, why exactly did you decide to ruin Esme's pillows?" I asked, sitting up and shaking more downfrom my hair.　　He had already pulled on a pair of loose khaki pants, and he stood by the door, rumpling his hair,dislodging a few feathers of his own.　　"I don't know if I decided to do anything last night," he muttered. "We're just lucky it was the pillowsand not you." He inhaled deeply and then shook his head, as if shaking off the dark thought. A veryauthentic-looking smile spread across his face, but I guessed it took a lot of work to put it there.　　I slid carefully off the high bed and stretched again, more aware, now, of the aches and sore spots. Iheard him gasp. He turned away from me, and his hands balled up, knuckles white.　　"Do I look that hideous?" I asked, working to keep my tone light. His breath caught, but he didn't turn,probably to hide his expression from me. I walked to the bathroom to check for myself.　　I stared at my naked body in the full-length mirror behind the door.　　I'd definitely had worse. There was a faint shadow across one of my cheekbones, and my lips were alittle swollen, but other than that, my face was fine. The rest of me was decorated with patches of blueand purple. I concentrated on the bruises that would be the hardest to hide—my arms and my shoulders.　　They weren't so bad. My skin marked up easily. By the time a bruise showed I'd usually forgotten howI'd come by it. Of course, these were just developing. I'd look even worse tomorrow. That would notmake things any easier.　　I looked at my hair, then, and groaned.　　"Bella?" He was right there behind me as soon as I'd made a sound.　　"I'll never get this all out of my hair!" I pointed to my head, where it looked like a chicken was nesting. Istarted picking at the feathers.　　"You would be worried about your hair," he mumbled, but he came to stand behind me, pulling out thefeathersmuch more quickly.　　"How did you keep from laughing at this? I look ridiculous."He didn't answer; he just kept plucking. And I knew the answer anyway—there was nothing that wouldbe funny to him in this mood.　　'This isn't going to work," I sighed after a minute. "It's all dried in. I'm going to have to try to wash it out."I turned around, wrapping my arms around his cool waist. "Do you want to help me?"Td better find some food for you," he said in a quiet voice, and he gently unwound my arms. I sighed ashe disappeared, moving too fast.　　It looked like my honeymoon was over. The thought put a big lump in my throat.　　When I was mostly feather-free and dressed in an unfamiliar white cotton dress that concealed the worstof the violet blotches, I padded off barefoot to where the smell of eggs and bacon and Cheddar cheesewas coming from.　　Edward stood in front of the stainless steel stove, sliding an omelet onto the light blue plate waiting on thecounter. The scent of the food overwhelmed me. I felt like I could eat the plate and the frying pan, too;my stomach snarled.　　"Here," he said. He turned with a smile on his face and set the plate on a small tiled table.　　I sat in one of the two metal chairs and started snarfing down the hot eggs. They burned my throat, but Ididn't care.　　He sat down across from me. "I'm not feeding you often enough."I swallowed and then reminded him, "I was asleep. This is really good, by the way. Impressive forsomeone who doesn't eat.""Food Network," he said, flashing my favorite crooked smile.　　I was happy to see it, happy that he seemed more like his normal self.　　"Where did the eggs come from?""I asked the cleaning crew to stock the kitchen. A first, for this place. I'll have to ask them to deal withthe feathers.... " He trailed off, his gaze fixed on a space above my head. I didn't respond, trying to avoidsaying anything that would upset him again.　　I ate everything, though he'd made enough for two.　　"Thank you," I told him. I leaned across the table to kiss him. He kissed me back automatically, and thensuddenly stiffened and leaned away.　　I gritted my teeth, and the question I meant to ask came out sounding like an accusation. "You aren'tgoing to touch me again while we're here, are you?"He hesitated, then half-smiled and raised his hand to stroke my cheek. His fingers lingered softly on myskin, and I couldn't help leaning my face into his palm.　　"You know that's not what I meant."He sighed and dropped his hand. "I know. And you're right." He paused, lifting his chin slightly. Andthen he spoke again with firm conviction. "I will not make love with you until you've been changed. I willnever hurt you again."
    Chapter 6 Distractions
    My entertainment became the number-one priority on isle Esme. We snorkeled (well, I snorkeled whilehe flaunted his ability to go without oxygen indefinitely). We explored the small jungle that ringed therocky little peak. We visited the parrots that lived in the canopy on the south end of the island. Wewatched the sunset from the rocky western cove. We swam with the porpoises that played in the warm,shallow waters there. Or at least I did; when Edward was in the water, the porpoises disappeared as if ashark was near.　　I knew what was going on. He was trying to keep me busy, distracted, so I that wouldn't continuebadgering him about the sex thing. Whenever I tried to talk him into taking it easy with one of the millionDVDs under the big-screen plasma TV, he would lure me out of the house with magic words like coralreefs and submerged caves and sea turtles. We were going, going, going all day, so that I found myselfcompletely famished and exhausted when the sun eventually set.　　I drooped over my plate after I finished dinner every night; once I'd actually fallen asleep right at thetable and he'd had to carry me to bed. Part of it was that Edward always made too much food for one,but I was so hungry after swimming and climbing all day that I ate most of it. Then, full and worn out, Icould barely keep my eyes open. All part of the plan, no doubt.　　Exhaustion didn't help much with my attempts at persuasion. But I didn't give up. I tried reasoning,pleading, and grouching, all to no avail. I was usually unconscious before I could really press my case far.　　And then my dreams felt so real—nightmares mostly, made more vivid, I guessed, by the too-brightcolors of the island—that I woke up tired no matter how long I slept.　　About a week or so after we'd gotten to the island, I decided to try compromise. It had worked for us inthe past.　　I was sleeping in the blue room now. The cleaning crew wasn't due until the next day, and so the whiteroom still had a snowy blanket of down. The blue room was smaller, the bed more reasonablyproportioned. The walls weredark, paneled in teak, and the fittings were all luxurious blue silk.　　I'd taken to wearing some of Alice's lingerie collection to sleep in at night—which weren't so revealingcompared to the scanty bikinis she'd packed for me when it came right down to it. I wondered if she'dseen a vision of why I would want such things, and then shuddered, embarrassed by that thought.　　I'd started out slow with innocent ivory satins, worried that revealing more of my skin would be theopposite of helpful, but ready to try anything. Edward seemed to notice nothing, as if I were wearing thesame ratty old sweats I wore at home.　　The bruises were much better now—yellowing in some places and disappearing altogether in others—sotonight I pulled out one of the scarier pieces as I got ready in the paneled bathroom. It was black, lacy,and embarrassing to look at even when it wasn't on. I was careful not to look in the mirror before I wentback to the bedroom. I didn't want to lose my nerve.　　I had the satisfaction of watching his eyes pop open wide for just a second before he controlled hisexpression.　　"What do you think?" I asked, pirouetting so that he could see every angle.　　He cleared his throat. "You look beautiful. You always do.""Thanks," I said a bit sourly.　　I was too tired to resist climbing quickly into the soft bed. He put his arms around me and pulled meagainst his chest, but this was routine—it was too hot to sleep without his cool body close.　　"I'll make you a deal," I said sleepily.　　"I will not make any deals with you," he answered.　　"You haven't even heard what I'm offering.""It doesn't matter."I sighed. "Dang it. And I really wanted... Oh well."He rolled his eyes.　　I closed mine and let the bait sit there. I yawned.　　It took only a minute—not long enough for me to zonk out.　　"All right. What is it you want?"I gritted my teeth for a second, fighting a smile. If there was one thing he couldn't resist, it was anopportunity to give me something.　　"Well, I was thinking... I know that the whole Dartmouth thing was just supposed to be a cover story,but honestly, one semester of college probably wouldn't kill me," I said, echoing his words from long ago,when he'd tried to persuade me to put off becoming a vampire. "Charlie would get a thrill out ofDartmouth stories, I bet. Sure, it might be embarrassing if I can't keep up with all the brainiacs. Still...　　eighteen, nineteen. It's really not such a big difference. It's not like I'm going to get crow's feet in the nextyear."He was silent for a long moment. Then, in a low voice, he said, "You would wait. You would stayhuman."I held my tongue, letting the offer sink in.　　"Why are you doing this to me?" he said through his teeth, his tone suddenly angry. "Isn't it hard enoughwithout all of this?" He grabbed a handful of lace that was ruffled on my thigh. For a moment, I thoughthe was going to rip it from the seam. Then his hand relaxed. "It doesn't matter. I won't make any dealswith you.""I want to goto college.""No, you don't. And there is nothing that is worth risking your life again. That's worth hurting you.""But I do want to go. Well, it's not college as much as it's that I want—I want to be human a little whilelonger."He closed his eyes and exhaled through his nose. "You are making me insane, Bella. Haven't we had thisargument a million times, you always begging to be a vampire without delay?""Yes, but... well, I have a reason to be human that I didn't have before.""What's that?""Guess," I said, and I dragged myself off the pillows to kiss him.　　He kissed me back, but not in a way that made me think I was winning. It was more like he was beingcareful not to hurt my feelings; he was completely, maddeningly in control of himself. Gently, he pulled meaway after a moment and cradled me against his chest.　　"You are so human, Bella. Ruled by your hormones." He chuckled.　　"That's the whole point, Edward. I like this part of being human. I don't want to give it up yet. I don'twant to wait through years of being a blood-crazed newborn for some part of this to come back to me."I yawned, and he smiled.　　"You're tired. Sleep, love." He started humming the lullaby he'd composed for me when we first met.　　"I wonder why I'm so tired," I muttered sarcastically. "That couldn't be part of your scheme or anything."He just chuckled once and went back to humming.　　"For as tired as I've been, you'd think I'd sleep better."The song broke off. "You've been sleeping like the dead, Bella. You haven't said a word in your sleepsince we got here. If it weren't for the snoring, I'd worry you were slipping into a coma."I ignored the snoring jibe; I didn't snore. "I haven't been tossing? That's weird. Usually I'm all over thebed when I'm having nightmares. And shouting.""You've been having nightmares?""Vivid ones. They make me so tired." I yawned. "I can't believe I haven't been babbling about them allnight.""What are they about?""Different things—but the same, you know, because of the colors.""Colors?""It's all so bright and real. Usually, when I'm dreaming, I know that I am. With these, I don't know I'masleep. It makes them scarier."He sounded disturbed when he spoke again. "What is frightening you?"I shuddered slightly. "Mostly ..." I hesitated.　　"Mostly?" he prompted.　　I wasn't sure why, but I didn't want to tell him about the child in my recurring nightmare; there wassomething private about that particular horror. So, instead of giving him the full description, I gave himjust one element. Certainly enough to frighten me or anyone else.　　"The Volturi," I whispered.　　He hugged me tighter. "They aren't going to bother us anymore. You'll be immortal soon, and they'll haveno reason."I let him comfort me, feeling a little guilty that he'd misunderstood. The nightmares weren't like that,exactly. It wasn't that I was afraid for myself—I was afraid for the boy.　　He wasn't the same boy as that first dream—the vampire child with the bloodred eyes who sat on a pileof dead people I loved. This boy I'd dreamed of four times in the last week was definitely human; hischeeks were flushed and his wide eyes were a soft green. But just like the other child, he shook with fearand desperation as the Volturi closed in on us.　　In this dream that was both new and old, I simply had to protect the unknown child. There was no otheroption. At the same time, I knew that I would fail.　　He saw the desolation on my face. "What can I do to help?"I shook it off. "They're just dreams, Edward.""Do you want me to sing to you? Ill sing all night if it will keep the bad dreams away.""They're not all bad. Some are nice. So... colorful. Underwater, with the fish and the coral. It all seemslike it's really happening—I don't know that I'm dreaming. Maybe this island is the problem. It's reallybright here.""Do you want to go home?""No. No, not yet. Can't we stay awhile longer?""We can stay as long as you want, Bella," he promised me.　　"When does the semester start? I wasn't paying attention before."He sighed. He may have started humming again, too, but I was under before I could be sure.　　Later, when I awoke in the dark, it was with shock. The dream had been so very real... so vivid, sosensory.... I gasped aloud, now, disoriented by the dark room. Only a second ago, it seemed, I had beenunder the brilliant sun.　　"Bella?" Edward whispered, his arms tight around me, shaking me gently. "Are you all right, sweetheart?""Oh," I gasped again. Just a dream. Not real. To my utter astonishment, tears overflowed from my eyeswithout warning, gushing down my face.　　"Bella!" he said—louder, alarmed now. "What's wrong?" He wiped the tears from my hot cheeks withcold, frantic fingers, but others followed.　　"It was only a dream." I couldn't contain the low sob that broke in my voice. The senseless tears weredisturbing,but I couldn't get control of the staggering grief that gripped me. I wanted so badly for the dream to bereal.　　"It's okay, love, you're fine. I'm here." He rocked me back and forth, a little too fast to soothe. "Did youhave another nightmare? It wasn't real, it wasn't real.""Not a nightmare." I shook my head, scrubbing the back of my hand against my eyes. "It was a gooddream." My voice broke again.　　"Then why are you crying?" he asked, bewildered.　　"Because I woke up," I wailed, wrapping my arms around his neck in a chokehold and sobbing into histhroat.　　He laughed once at my logic, but the sound was tense with concern.　　"Everything's all right, Bella. Take deep breaths.""It was so real," I cried. "I wanted it to be real.""Tell me about it," he urged. "Maybe that will help.""We were on the beach. ..." I trailed off, pulling back to look with tear-filled eyes at his anxious angel'sface, dim in the darkness. I stared at him broodingly as the unreasonable grief began to ebb.　　"And?" he finally prompted.　　I blinked the tears out of my eyes, torn. "Oh, Edward ...""Tell me, Bella," he pleaded, eyes wild with worry at the pain in my voice.　　But I couldn't. Instead I clutched my arms around his neck again and locked my mouth with hisfeverishly. It wasn't desire at all—it was need, acute to the point of pain. His response was instant butquickly followed by his rebuff.　　He struggled with me as gently as he could in his surprise, holding me away, grasping my shoulders.　　"No, Bella," he insisted, looking at me as if he was worried that I'd lost my mind.　　My arms dropped, defeated, the bizarre tears spilling in a fresh torrent down my face, a new sob risingin my throat. He was right—I must be crazy.　　He stared at me with confused, anguished eyes.　　"I'm s-s-s-orry," I mumbled.　　But he pulled me to him then, hugging me tightly to his marble chest.　　"I can't, Bella, I can't!" His moan was agonized.　　"Please," I said, my plea muffled against his skin. "Please, Edward?"I couldn't tell if he was moved by the tears trembling in my voice, or if he was unprepared to deal withthe suddenness of my attack, or if his need was simply as unbearable in that moment as my own. Butwhatever the reason, he pulled my lips back to his, surrendering with a groan.　　And we began where my dream had left off.　　I stayed very still when I woke up in the morning and tried to keep my breathing even. I was afraid toopen my eyes.　　I was lying across Edward's chest, but he was very still and his arms were not wrapped around me. Thatwas a bad sign. I was afraid to admit I was awake and face his anger—no matter whom it was directedat today.　　Carefully, I peeked through my eyelashes. He was staring up at the dark ceiling, his arms behind hishead. I pulled myself up on my elbow so that I could see his face better. It was smooth, expressionless.　　"How much trouble am I in?" I asked in a small voice.　　"Heaps," he said, but turned his head and smirked at me.　　I breathed a sigh of relief. "I am sorry," I said. "I didn't mean... Well, I don't know exactly what that waslast night." I shook my head at the memory of the irrational tears, the crushing grief.　　"You never did tell me what your dream was about.""I guess I didn't—but I sort of showed you what it was about." I laughed nervously.　　"Oh," he said. His eyes widened, and then he blinked. "Interesting.""It was a very good dream," I murmured. He didn't comment, so a few seconds later I asked, "Am Iforgiven?""I'm thinking about it."I sat up, planning to examine myself—there didn't seem to be any feathers, at least. But as I moved, anodd wave of vertigo hit. I swayed and fell back against the pillows.　　"Whoa... head rush."His arms were around me then. "You slept for a long time. Twelve hours.""Twelve?"How strange.　　I gave myself a quick once-over while I spoke, trying to be inconspicuous about it. I looked fine. Thebruises on my arms were still a week old, yellowing. I stretched experimentally. I felt fine, too. Well,better than fine, actually.　　"Is the inventory complete?"I nodded sheepishly. "The pillows all appear to have survived.""Unfortunately, I can't say the same for your, er, nightgown." He nodded toward the foot of the bed,where several scraps of black lace were strewn across the silk sheets.　　"That's too bad," I said. "I liked that one.""I did, too.""Were there any other casualties?" I asked timidly.　　"I'll have to buy Esme a new bed frame," he confessed, glancing over his shoulder. I followed his gazeand was shocked to see that large chunks of wood had apparently been gouged from the left side of theheadboard.　　"Hmm." I frowned. "You'd think I would have heard that.""You seem to be extraordinarily unobservant when your attention is otherwise involved.""I was a bit absorbed," I admitted, blushing a deep red.　　He touched my burning cheek and sighed. "I'm really going to miss that."I stared at his face, searching for any signs of the anger or remorse I feared. He gazed back at meevenly, his expression calm but otherwise unreadable.　　"How are you feeling?'
    Chapter 7 He Laughed
    　　"What?" I demanded.　　"You look so guilty—like you've committed a crime.""I feel guilty," I muttered.　　"So you seduced your all-too-willing husband. That's not a capital offense."He seemed to be teasing.　　My cheeks got hotter. "The word seduced implies a certain amount of premeditation.""Maybe that was the wrong word," he allowed.　　"You're not angry?"He smiled ruefully. Tm not angry.""Why not?""Well. . ." He paused. "I didn't hurt you, for one thing. It was easier this time, to control myself, tochannel the excesses." His eyes flickered to the damaged frame again. "Maybe because I had a betteridea of what to expect."A hopeful smile started to spread across my face. "I told you that it was all about practice."He rolled his eyes.　　My stomach growled, and he laughed. "Breakfast time for the human?" he asked.　　"Please," I said, hopping out of bed. I moved too quickly, though, and had to stagger drunkenly to regainmy balance. He caught me before I could stumble into the dresser.　　"Are you all right?""If I don't have a better sense of equilibrium in my next life, I'm demanding a refund."I cooked this morning, frying up some eggs—too hungry to do anything more elaborate. Impatient, Iflipped them onto a plate after just a few minutes.　　"Since when do you eat eggs sunny-side up?" he asked.　　"Since now.""Do you know how many eggs you've gone through in the last week?" He pulled the trash bin out fromunder the sink—it was full of empty blue cartons.　　"Weird," I said after swallowing a scorching bite. "This place is messing with my appetite." And mydreams, and my already dubious balance. "But I like it here. Well probably have to leave soon, though,won't we, to make it to Dartmouth in time? Wow, I guess we need to find a place to live and stuff, too."He sat down next to me. "You can give up the college pretense now—you've gotten what you wanted.　　And we didn't agree to a deal, so there are no strings attached."I snorted. "It wasn't a pretense, Edward. I don't spend my free time plotting like some people do. Whatcan we do to wear Bella out today?" I said in a poor impression of his voice. He laughed, unashamed.　　"I really do want a little more time being human." I leaned over to run my hand across his bare chest. "Ihave not had enough."He gave me a dubious look. "For this?" he asked, catching my hand as it moved down his stomach.　　"Sex was the key all along?" He rolled his eyes. "Why didn't i think of that?" he muttered sarcastically. "Icould have saved myself a lot of arguments."I laughed. "Yeah, probably.""You are so human," he said again.　　"I know."A hint of a smile pulled at his lips. "We're going to Dartmouth? Really?""I'll probably fail out in one semester.""I'll tutor you." The smile was wide now. "You're going to love college.""Do you think we can find an apartment this late?"He grimaced, looking guilty. "Well, we sort of already have a house there. You know, just in case.""You bought a house?""Real estate is a good investment."I raised one eyebrow and then let it go. "So we're ready, then.""I'll have to see if we can keep your 'before' car for a little longer___""Yes, heaven forbid I not be protected from tanks."He grinned.　　"How much longer can we stay?" I asked.　　"We're fine on time. A few more weeks, if you want. And then we can visit Charlie before we go toNew Hampshire. We could spend Christmas with Renee___"His words painted a very happy immediate future, one free of pain for everyone involved. TheJacob-drawer, all but forgotten, rattled, and i amended the thought—for almost everyone.　　This wasn't getting any easier. Now that I'd discovered exactly how good being human could be, it wastempting to let my plans drift. Eighteen or nineteen, nineteen or twenty... Did it really matter? I wouldn'tchange so much in a year. And being human with Edward... The choice got trickier every day.　　"A few weeks," I agreed. And then, because there never seemed to be enough time, I added, "So I wasthinking—you know what I was saying about practice before?"He laughed. "Can you hold on to that thought? I hear a boat. The cleaning crew must be here."He wanted me to hold on to that thought. So did that mean he was not going to give me any moretrouble about practicing? I smiled.　　"Let me explain the mess in the white room to Gustavo, and then we can go out. There's a place in thejungle on the south—""I don't want to go out. i am not hiking all over the island today. I want to stay here and watch a movie."He pursed his lips, trying not to laugh at my disgruntled tone. "All right, whatever you'd like. Why don'tyou pick one out while I get the door?""I didn't hear a knock."He cocked his head to the side, listening. A half second later, a faint, timid rap on the door sounded. Hegrinned and turned for the hallway.　　I wandered over to the shelves under the big TV and started scanning through the titles. It was hard todecide where to begin. They had more DVDs than a rental store.　　I could hear Edward's low, velvet voice as he came back down the hall, conversing fluidly in what Iassumed was perfect Portuguese. Another, harsher, human voice answered in the same tongue.　　Edward led them into the room, pointing toward the kitchen on his way. The two Brazilians lookedincredibly short and dark next to him. One was a round man, the other a slight female, both their facescreased with lines. Edward gestured to me with a proud smile, and I heard my name mixed in with aflurry of unfamiliar words. I flushed a little as I thought of the downy mess in the white room, which theywould soon encounter. The little man smiled at me politely.　　But the tiny coffee-skinned woman didn't smile. She stared at me with a mixture of shock, worry, andmost of all, wide-eyed fear. Before I could react, Edward motioned for them to follow him toward thechicken coop, and they were gone.　　When he reappeared, he was alone. He walked swiftly to my side and wrapped his arms around me.　　"What's with her?" I whispered urgently, remembering her panicked expression.　　He shrugged, unperturbed. "Kaure's part Ticuna Indian. She was raised to be more superstitious—oryou could call it more aware—than those who live in the modern world. She suspects what I am, orclose enough." He still didn't sound worried. "They have their own legends here. The Libishomen—ablood-drinking demon who preys exclusively on beautiful women." He leered at me.　　Beautiful women only? Well, that was kind of flattering.　　"She looked terrified," I said.　　"She is—but mostly she's worried about you.""Me?""She's afraid of why I have you here, all alone." He chuckled darkly and then looked toward the wall ofmovies. "Oh well, why don't you choose something for us to watch? That's an acceptably human thing todo.""Yes, I'm sure a movie will convince her that you're human." I laughed and clasped my arms securelyaround his neck, stretching up on my tiptoes. He leaned down so that I could kiss him, and then his armstightened around me, lifting me off the floor so he didn't have to bend.　　"Movie, schmovie," I muttered as his lips moved down my throat, twisting my fingers in his bronze hair.　　Then I heard a gasp, and he put me down abruptly. Kaure stood frozen in the hallway, feathers in herblack hair, a large sack of more feathers in her arms, an expression of horror on her face. She stared atme, her eyes bugging out, as I blushed and looked down. Then she recovered herself and murmuredsomething that, even in an unfamiliar language, was clearly an apology. Edward smiled and answered in afriendly tone. She turned her dark eyes awayand continued down the hall.　　"She was thinking what I think she was thinking, wasn't she?" I muttered.　　He laughed at my convoluted sentence. "Yes.""Here," I said, reaching out at random and grabbing a movie. "Put this on and we can pretend to watchit."It was an old musical with smiling faces and fluffy dresses on the front.　　"Very honeymoonish," Edward approved.　　While actors on the screen danced their way through a perky introduction song, I lolled on the sofa,snuggled into Edward's arms.　　"Will we move back into the white room now?" I wondered idly.　　"I don't know.... I've already mangled the headboard in the other room beyond repair—maybe if welimit the destruction to one area of the house, Esme might invite us back someday."I smiled widely. "So there will be more destruction?"He laughed at my expression. "I think it might be safer if it's premeditated, rather than if I wait for you toassault me again.""It would only be a matter of time," I agreed casually, but my pulse was racing in my veins.　　"Is there something the matter with your heart?""Nope. Healthy as a horse." I paused. "Did you want to go survey the demolition zone now?""Maybe it would be more polite to wait until we're alone. You may not notice me tearing the furnitureapart, but it would probably scare them."In truth, I'd already forgotten the people in the other room. "Right. Drat."Gustavo and Kaure moved quietly through the house while I waited impatiently for them to finish andtried to pay attention to the happily-ever-after on the screen. I was starting to get sleepy—though,according to Edward, I'd slept half the day—when a rough voice startled me. Edward sat up, keepingme cradled against him, and answered Gustavo in flowing Portuguese. Gustavo nodded and walkedquietly toward the front door.　　"They're finished," Edward told me.　　"So that would mean that we're alone now?""How about lunch first?" he suggested.　　I bit my lip, torn by the dilemma. I was pretty hungry.　　With a smile, he took my hand and led me to the kitchen. He knew my face so well, it didn't matter thathe couldn't read my mind.　　"This is getting out of hand," I complained when I finally felt full.　　"Do you want to swim with the dolphins this afternoon—burn off the calories?" he asked.　　"Maybe later. I had another idea for burning calories.""And what was that?""Well, there's an awful lot of headboard left—"But I didn't finish. He'd already swept me up into his arms, and his lips silenced mine as he carried mewith inhuman speed to the blue room.　　7. UNEXPECTEDThe line of black advanced on me through the shroud-like mist. I could see their dark ruby eyes glintingwith desire, lusting for the kill. Their lips pulled back over their sharp, wet teeth—some to snarl, some tosmile.　　I heard the child behind me whimper, but I couldn't turn to look at him. Though I was desperate to besure that he was safe, I could not afford any lapse in focus now.　　They ghosted closer, their black robes billowing slightly with the movement. I saw their hands curl intobone-colored claws. They started to drift apart, angling to come at us from all sides. We weresurrounded. We were going to die.　　And then, like a burst of light from a flash, the whole scene was different. Yet nothing changed—theVolturi still stalked toward us, poised to kill. All that really changed was how the picture looked to me.　　Suddenly, I was hungry for it. I tvanfec/them to charge. The panic changed to bloodlust as I crouchedforward, a smile on my face, and a growl ripped through my bared teeth.　　I jolted upright, shocked out of the dream.　　The room was black. It was also steamy hot. Sweat matted my hair at the temples and rolled down mythroat.　　I groped the warm sheets and found them empty.　　"Edward?"Just then, my fingers encountered something smooth and flat and stiff. One sheet of paper, folded in half.　　I took the note with me and felt my way across the room to the light switch.　　The outside of the note was addressed to Mrs. Cullen.　　I'm hoping you won't wake and notice my absence, but, if you should, I'll be back very soon. I've justgone to the mainland to hunt Go back to sleep and I'll be here when you wake again. I love you.　　I sighed. We'd been here about two weeks now, so I should have been expecting that he would have toleave, but I hadn't been thinking about time. We seemed to exist outside of time here, just drifting along ina perfect state.　　I wiped the sweat off my forehead. I felt absolutely wide awake, though the clock on the dresser said itwas after one. I knew i would never be able to sleep as hot and sticky as I felt. Not to mention the factthat if I shut off the light and closed my eyes, I was sure to see those prowling black figures in my head.　　I got up and wandered aimlessly through the dark house, flipping on lights. It felt so big and emptywithout Edward there. Different.　　I ended up in the kitchen and decided that maybe comfort food was what I needed.　　I poked around in the fridge until I found all the ingredients for fried chicken. The popping and sizzling ofthe chicken in the pan was a nice, homey sound; I felt less nervous while it filled the silence.　　It smelled so good that I started eating it right out of the pan, burning my tongue in the process. By thefifth or sixth bite, though, it had cooled enough for me to taste it. My chewing slowed. Was theresomething off about the flavor? I checked the meat, and it was white all the way through, but I wonderedif it was completely done. I took another experimental bite; I chewed twice. Ugh—definitely bad. Ijumped up to spit it into the sink. Suddenly, the chicken-and-oil smell was revolting. I took the wholeplate and shook it into the garbage, then opened the windows to chase away the scent. A coolish breezehad picked up outside. It felt good on my skin.　　I was abruptly exhausted, but i didn't want to go back to the hot room. So I opened more windows inthe TV room and lay on the couch right beneath them. I turned on the same movie we'd watched theother day and quickly fell asleep to the bright opening song.　　When I opened my eyes again, the sun was halfway up the sky, but it was not the light that woke me.　　Cool arms were around me, pulling me against him. At the same time, a sudden pain twisted in mystomach, almost like the aftershock of catching a punch in the gut.　　Tm sorry," Edward was murmuring as he wiped a wintry hand across my clammy forehead. "So muchfor thoroughness. I didn't think about how hot you would be with me gone. I'll have an air conditionerinstalled before I leave again."I couldn't concentrate on what he was saying. "Excuse me!" I gasped, struggling to get free of his arms.　　He dropped his hold automatically. "Bella?"I streaked for the bathroom with my hand clamped over my mouth. I felt so horrible that I didn't evencare—at first—that he was with me while I crouched over the toilet and was violently sick.　　"Bella? What's wrong?"I couldn't answer yet. He held me anxiously, keeping my hair out of my face, waiting till I could breatheagain.　　"Damn rancid chicken," I moaned.　　"Are you all right?" His voice was strained.　　"Fine," I panted. "It's just food poisoning. You don't need to see this. Go away.""Not likely,Bella.""Go away," I moaned again, struggling to get up so I could rinse my mouth out. He helped me gently,ignoring the weak shoves I aimed at him.　　After my mouth was clean, he carried me to the bed and sat me down carefully, supporting me with hisarms.　　"Food poisoning?""Yeah," I croaked. "I made some chicken last night. It tasted off, so I threw it out. But I ate a few bitesfirst."He put a cold hand on my forehead. It felt nice. "How do you feel now?"I thought about that for a moment. The nausea had passed as suddenly as it had come, and I felt like Idid any other morning. "Pretty normal. A little hungry, actually."He made me wait an hour and keep down a big glass of water before he fried me some eggs. I feltperfectly normal, just a little tired from being up in the middle of the night. He put onCNN—we'd beenso out of touch, world war three could have broken out and we wouldn't have known—and I loungeddrowsily across his lap.　　I got bored with the news and twisted around to kiss him. Just like this morning, a sharp pain hit mystomach when I moved. I lurched away from him, my hand tight over my mouth. I knew I'd never make itto the bathroom this time, so I ran to the kitchen sink.　　He held my hair again.　　"Maybe we should go back to Rio, see a doctor," he suggested anxiously when I was rinsing my mouthafterward.　　I shook my head and edged toward the hallway. Doctors meant needles. "I'll be fine right after I brushmy teeth."When my mouth tasted better, I searched through my suitcase for the little first-aid kit Alice had packedfor me, full of human things like bandages and painkillers and—my object now—Pepto-Bismol. Maybe Icould settle my stomach and calm Edward down.　　But before I found the Pepto, I happened across something else that Alice had packed for me. I pickedup the small blue box and stared at it in my hand for a long moment, forgetting everything else.　　Then I started counting in my head. Once. Twice. Again.　　Theknock startled me; the little box fell back into the suitcase.　　"Are you well?" Edward asked through the door. "Did you get sick again?""Yes and no," I said, but my voice sounded strangled.　　"Bella? Can I please come in?" Worriedly now.　　"O... kay?"He came in and appraised my position, sitting cross-legged on the floor by the suitcase, and myexpression, blank and staring. He sat next to me, his hand going to my forehead at once.　　"What's wrong?""How many days has it been since the wedding?" I whispered.　　"Seventeen," he answered automatically. "Bella, what is it?"I was counting again. I held up a finger, cautioning him to wait, and mouthed the numbers to myself. I'dbeen wrong about the days before. We'd been here longer than I'd thought. I started over again.　　"Bella!" he whispered urgently. "I'm losing my mind over here."I tried to swallow. It didn't work. So I reached into the suitcase and fumbled around until I found thelittle blue box of tampons again. I held them up silently.　　He stared at me in confusion. "What? Are you trying to pass this illness off as PMS?""No," I managed to choke out. "No, Edward. I'm trying to tell you that my period is five days late."His facial expression didn't change. It was like I hadn't spoken.　　"I don't think I have food poisoning," I added.　　He didn't respond. He had turned into a sculpture.　　"The dreams," I mumbled to myself in a flat voice. "Sleeping so much. The crying. All that food. Oh.　　Oh. Oh"Edward's stare seemed glassy, as if he couldn't see me anymore.　　Reflexively, almost involuntarily, my hand dropped to my stomach.　　"Oh!" I squeaked again.　　I lurched to my feet, slipping out of Edward's unmoving hands. I'd never changed out of the little silkshorts and camisole I'd worn to bed. I yanked the blue fabric out of the way and stared at my stomach.　　"Impossible," I whispered.　　I had absolutely no experience with pregnancy or babies or any part of that world, but I wasn't an idiot.　　I'd seen enough movies and TV shows to know that this wasn't how it worked. I was only five days late.　　If I was pregnant, my body wouldn't even have registered that fact. I would not have morning sickness. Iwould not have changed my eating or sleeping habits.　　And I most definitely would not have a small but defined bump sticking out between my hips.　　I twisted my torso back and forth, examining it from every angle, as if it would disappear in exactly theright light. I ran my fingers over the subtle bulge, surprised by how rock hard it felt under my skin.　　"Impossible," I said again, because, bulge or no bulge, period or no period (and there was definitely noperiod, though I'd never been late a day in my life), there was no way I could be pregnant The onlyperson I'd ever had sex with was a vampire, for crying out loud.　　A vampire who was still frozen on the floor with no sign of ever moving again.　　So there had to be some other explanation, then. Something wrong with me. A strange South Americandisease with all the signs of pregnancy, only accelerated...　　And then I remembered something—a morning of internet research that seemed a lifetime ago now.　　Sitting at the old desk in my room at Charlie's house with gray light glowing dully through the window,staring at my ancient, wheezing computer, reading avidly through a web-site called "Vampires A-Z." Ithad been less than twenty-four hours since Jacob Black, trying to entertain me with the Quileute legendshe didn't believe in yet, had told me that Edward was a vampire. I'd scanned anxiously through the firstentries on the site, which was dedicated to vampiremyths around the world. The Filipino Danag, the Hebrew Estrie, the Romanian Varacolaci, the ItalianStregoni benefici (a legend actually based on my new father-in-law's early exploits with the Volturi, notthat I'd known anything about that at the time)... I'd paid less and less attention as the stories had grownmore and more implausible. I only remembered vague bits of the later entries. They mostly seemed likeexcuses dreamed up to explain things like infant mortality rates—and infidelity. No, honey, I'm nothaving an affair! That sexy woman you saw sneaking out of the house was an evil succubus. I'mlucky I escaped with my life! (Of course, with what I knew now about Tanya and her sisters, Isuspected that some of those excuses had been nothing but fact.) There had been one for the ladies, too.　　How can you accuse me of cheating on you—just because you've come home from a two-year seavoyage and I'm pregnant? It was the incubus. He hypnotized me with his mystical vampirepowers....　　That had been part of the definition of the incubus—the ability to father children with his hapless prey.　　I shook my head, dazed. But...　　I thought of Esme and especially Rosalie. Vampires couldn't have children. If it were possible, Rosaliewould have found a way by now. The incubus myth was nothing but a fable.　　Except that... well, there was a difference. Of course Rosalie could not conceive a child, because shewas frozen in the state in which she passed from human to inhuman. Totally unchanging. And humanwomen's bodies had to change to bear children. The constant change of a monthly cycle for one thing,and then the bigger changes needed to accommodate a growing child. Rosalie's body couldn't change.　　But mine could. Mine did. I touched the bump on my stomach that had not been there yesterday.　　And human men—well, they pretty much stayed the same from puberty to death. I remembered arandom bit of trivia, gleaned from who knows where: Charlie Chaplin was in his seventies when hefathered his youngest child. Men had no such thing as child-bearing years or cycles of fertility.　　Of course, how would anyone know if vampire men could father children, when their partners were notable? What vampire on earth would have the restraint necessary to test the theory with a human woman?　　Or the inclination?　　I could think of only one.　　Part of my head was sorting through fact and memory and speculation, while the other half—the partthat controlled the ability to move even the smallest muscles—was stunned beyond the capacity fornormal operations. I couldn't move my lips to speak, though I wanted to ask Edward to please explain tome what was going on. I needed to go back to where he sat, to touch him, but my body wouldn't followinstructions. I could only stare at my shocked eyes in the mirror, my fingers gingerly pressed against theswelling on my torso.　　And then, like in my vivid nightmare last night, the scene abruptly transformed. Everything I saw in themirror looked completely different, though nothing actually was different.　　What happened to change everything was that a soft little nudge bumped my hand—from inside mybody.　　In the same moment, Edward's phone rang, shrill and demanding. Neither of us moved. It rang again andagain. I tried to tune it out while I pressed my fingers to my stomach, waiting. In the mirror my expressionwas no longerbewildered—it was wondering now. I barely noticed when the strange, silent tears started streamingdown my cheeks.　　The phone kept ringing. I wished Edward would answer it—I was having a moment. Possibly thebiggest of my life.　　Ring! Ring! Ring!　　Finally, the annoyance broke through everything else. I got down on my knees next to Edward—I foundmyself moving more carefully, a thousand times more aware of the way each motion felt—and patted hispockets until I found the phone. I half-expected him to thaw out and answer it himself, but he wasperfectly still.　　I recognized the number, and I could easily guess why she was calling.　　"Hi, Alice," I said. My voice wasn't much better than before. I cleared my throat.　　"Bella? Bella, areyou okay?""Yeah. Urn. Is Carlisle there?""He is. What's the problem?""I'm not... one hundred percent... sure___""Is Edward all right?" she asked warily. She called Carlisle's name away from the phone and thendemanded, "Why didn't he pick up the phone?" before I could answer her first question.　　"I'm not sure.""Bella,what's going on? I just saw—""What did you see?"There was a silence. "Here's Carlisle," she finally said.　　It felt like ice water had been injected in my veins. If Alice had seen a vision of me with a green-eyed,angel-faced child in my arms, she would have answered me, wouldn't she?　　While I waited through the split second it took for Carlisle to speak, the vision I'd imagined for Alicedanced behind my lids. A tiny, beautiful little baby, even more beautiful than the boy in my dream—a tinyEdward in my arms. Warmth shot through my veins, chasing the ice away.　　"Bella, it's Carlisle. What's going on?""I—" I wasn't sure how to answer. Would he laugh at my conclusions, tell me I was crazy? Was I justhaving another colorful dream? "I'm a little worried about Edward.... Can vampires go into shock?""Has he been harmed?" Carlisle's voice was suddenly urgent.　　"No, no," I assured him. "Just... taken by surprise.""I don't understand, Bella.""I think... well, I think that... maybe... I might be ..." I took a deep breath. "Pregnant."As if to back me up, there was another tiny nudge in my abdomen. My hand flew to my stomach.　　After a long pause, Carlisle's medical training kicked in.　　"When was the first day of your last menstrual cycle?""Sixteen days before the wedding." I'd done the mental math thoroughly enough just before to be able toanswer with certainty.　　"How do you feel?""Weird," I told him, and my voice broke. Another trickle of tears dribbled down my cheeks. "This isgoing to sound crazy—look, I know it's way too early for any of this. Maybe I am crazy. But I'm havingbizarre dreams and eating all the time and crying and throwing up and... and... I swear something movedinside me just now."Edward's head snapped up.　　I sighed in relief.　　Edward held his hand out for the phone, his face white and hard.　　"Urn, I think Edward wants to talk to you.""Put him on," Carlisle said in a strained voice.　　Not entirely sure that Edward could talk, I put the phone in his outstretched hand.　　He pressed it to his ear. "Is it possible?" he whispered.　　He listened for a long time, staring blankly at nothing.　　"And Bella?" he asked. His arm wrapped around me as he spoke, pulling me close into his side.　　He listened for what seemed like a long time and then said, "Yes. Yes, I will."He pulled the phone away from his ear and pressed the "end" button. Right away, he dialed a newnumber.　　"What did Carlisle say?" I asked impatiently.　　Edward answered in a lifeless voice. "He thinks you're pregnant."The words sent a warm shiver down my spine. The little nudger fluttered inside me.　　"Who are you calling now?" I asked as he put the phone back to his ear.　　"The airport. We're going home."Edward was on the phone for more than an hour without a break. I guessed that he was arranging ourflight home, but I couldn't be sure because he wasn't speaking English. It sounded like he was arguing; hespoke through his teeth a lot.　　While he argued, he packed. He whirled around the room like an angry tornado, leaving order ratherthan destruction in his path. He threw a set of my clothes on the bed without looking at them, so Iassumed it was time for me to get dressed. He continued with his argument while I changed, gesturingwith sudden, agitated movements.　　When I could no longer bear the violent energy radiating out of him, I quietly left the room. His manicconcentration made me sick to my stomach—not like the morning sickness, just uncomfortable. I wouldwait somewhere else for his mood to pass. I couldn't talk to this icy, focused Edward who honestlyfrightened me a little.　　Once again, I ended up in the kitchen. There was a bag of pretzels in the cupboard. I started chewing onthem absently, staring out the window at the sand and rocks and trees and ocean, everything glittering inthe sun.　　Someone nudged me.　　"I know," I said. "I don't want to go, either."I stared out the window for a moment, but the nudger didn't respond.　　"I don't understand," i whispered. "What is wrong here?"Surprising, absolutely. Astonishing, even. But wrong?　　No.　　So why was Edward so furious? He was the one who had actually wished out loud for a shotgunwedding.　　I tried to reason through it.　　Maybe it wasn't so confusing that Edward wanted us to go home right away. He'd want Carlisle tocheck me out, make sure my assumption was right—though there was absolutely no doubt in my head atthis point. Probably they'd want to figure out why I was already so pregnant, with the bump and thenudging and all of that. That wasn't normal.　　Once I thought of this, I was sure I had it. He must be so worried about the baby. I hadn't gotten aroundto freaking out yet. My brain worked slower than his—it was still stuck marveling over the picture it hadconjured up before: the tiny child with Edward's eyes—green, as his had been when he washuman—lying fair and beautiful in my arms. I hoped he would have Edward's face exactly, with nointerference from mine.　　It was funny how abruptly and entirely necessary this vision had become. From that first little touch, thewhole world had shifted. Where before there was just one thing i could not live without, now there weretwo. There was no division—my love was not split between them now; it wasn't like that. It was morelike my heart had grown, swollen up to twice its size in that moment. All that extra space, already filled.　　The increase was almost dizzying.　　I'd never really understood Rosalie's pain and resentment before. I'd never imagined myself a mother,never wanted that. It had been a piece of cake to promise Edward that I didn't care about giving upchildren for him, because I truly didn't. Children, in the abstract, had never appealed to me. They seemedto be loud creatures, often dripping some form of goo. I'd never had much to do with them. When I'ddreamed of Renee providing me with a brother, I'd always imagined an older brother. Someone to takecare of me, rather than the other way around.　　This child, Edward's child, was a whole different story.　　I wanted him like I wanted air to breathe. Not a choice—a necessity.　　Maybe I just had a really bad imagination. Maybe that was why I'd been unable to imagine that I wouldlike being married until after I already was—unable to see that I would want a baby until after one wasalready coming....　　As I put my hand on my stomach, waiting for the next nudge, tears streaked down my cheeks again.　　"Bella?"I turned, made wary by the tone of his voice. It was too cold, too careful. His face matched his voice,empty and hard.　　And then he saw that I was crying.　　"Bella!" Hecrossed the room in a flash and put his hands on my face. "Are you in pain?""No, no—"He pulled me against his chest. "Don't be afraid. We'll be home in sixteen hours. You'll be fine. Carlislewill be ready when we get there. We'll take care of this, and you'll be fine, you'll be fine.""Take care of this? What do you mean?"He leaned away and looked me in the eye. "We're going to get that thing out before it can hurt any partof you. Don't be scared. I wont let it hurt you.""That thing?" Igasped.　　He looked sharply away from me, toward the front door. "Dammit! I forgot Gustavo was due today. HIget rid of him and be right back." He darted out of the room.　　I clutched the counter for support. My knees were wobbly.　　Edward had just called my little nudger a thing. He said Carlisle would get it out.　　"No," I whispered.　　I'd gotten it wrong before. He didn't care about the baby atall. He wanted to hurt him. The beautifulpicture in my head shifted abruptly, changed into something dark. My pretty baby crying, my weak armsnot enough to protect him....　　What could I do? Would I be able to reason with them? What if I couldn't? Did this explain Alice'sstrange silence on the phone? Is that what she'd seen? Edward and Carlisle killing that pale, perfect childbefore he could live?　　"No," I whispered again, my voice stronger. That could not be. I would not allow it.　　I heard Edward speaking Portuguese again. Arguing again. His voice got closer, and I heard him grunt inexasperation. Then I heard another voice, low and timid. A woman's voice.　　He came into the kitchen ahead of her and went straight to me. He wiped the tears from my cheeks andmurmured in my ear through the thin, hard line of his lips.　　"She's insisting on leaving the food she brought—she made us dinner." If he had been less tense, lessfurious, I knew he would have rolled his eyes. "It's an excuse—she wants to make sure I haven't killedyou yet." His voice went ice cold at the end.　　Kaure edged nervously around the corner with a covered dish in her hands. I wished I could speakPortuguese, or that my Spanish was less rudimentary, so that I could try to thank this woman who haddared to anger a vampire just to check on me.　　Her eyes flickered between the two of us. I saw her measuring thecolor in my face, the moisture in myeyes. Mumbling something I didn't understand, she put the dish on the counter.　　Edward snapped something at her; I'd never heard him be so impolite before. She turned to go, and thewhirling motion of her long skirt wafted the smell of the food into my face. It was strong—onions andfish. I gagged and whirled for the sink. I felt Edward's hands on my forehead and heard his soothingmurmur through the roaring in my ears. His hands disappeared for a second, and I heard the refrigeratorslam shut. Mercifully, the smell disappeared with the sound, and Edward's hands were cooling myclammy face again. It was over quickly.　　I rinsed my mouth in the tap while he caressed the side of my face.　　There was a tentative little nudge in my womb.　　It's okay. We're okay,I thought toward the bump.　　Edward turned me around, pulling me into his arms. I rested my head on his shoulder. My hands,instinctively, folded over my stomach.　　I heard a little gasp and I looked up.　　The woman was still there, hesitating in the doorway with her hands half-outstretched as if she had beenlooking for some way to help. Her eyes were locked on my hands, popping wide with shock. Her mouthhung open.　　Then Edward gasped, too, and he suddenly turned to face the woman, pushing me slightly behind hisbody. His arm wrapped across my torso, like he was holding me back.　　Suddenly, Kaure was shouting at him—loudly, furiously, her unintelligible words flying across the roomlike knives. She raised her tiny fist in the air and took two steps forward, shaking it at him. Despite herferocity, it was easy to see the terror in her eyes.　　Edward stepped toward her, too, and I clutched at his arm, frightened for the woman. But when heinterrupted her tirade, his voice took me by surprise, especially considering how sharp he'd been with herwhen she wasn't screeching at him. It was low now; it was pleading. Not only that, but the sound wasdifferent, more guttural, the cadence off. I didn't think he was speaking Portuguese anymore.　　For a moment, the woman stared at him in wonder, and then her eyes narrowed as she barked out along question in the same alien tongue.　　I watched as his face grew sad and serious, and he nodded once. She took a quick step back andcrossed herself.　　He reached out to her, gesturing toward me and then resting his hand against my cheek. She repliedangrily again, waving her hands accusingly toward him, and then gestured to him. When she finished, hepleaded again with the same low, urgent voice.　　Her expression changed—she stared at him with doubt plain on her face as he spoke, her eyesrepeatedly flashing to my confused face. He stopped speaking, and she seemed to be deliberatingsomething. She looked back and forth between the two of us, and then, unconsciously it seemed, took astep forward.　　She made a motion with her hands, miming a shape like a balloon jutting out from her stomach. I started—did her legends of the predatory blood-drinker include this? Could she possibly know somethingabout what was growing inside me?　　She walked a few steps forward deliberately this time and asked a few brief questions, which heresponded to tensely. Then he became the questioner—one quick query. She hesitated and then slowlyshook her head. When he spoke again, his voice was so agonized that I looked up at him in shock. Hisface was drawn with pain.　　In answer, she walked slowly forward until she was close enough to lay her small hand on top of mine,over my stomach. She spoke one word in Portuguese.　　"Morte,"she sighed quietly. Then she turned, her shoulders bent as if the conversation had aged her, andleft the room.　　I knew enough Spanish for that one.　　Edward was frozen again, staring after her with the tortured expression fixed on his face. A fewmoments later, I heard a boat's engine putter to life and then fade into the distance.　　Edward did not move until I started for the bathroom. Then his hand caught my shoulder.　　"Where are you going?" His voice was a whisper of pain.　　"To brush my teeth again.""Don't worry about what she said. It's nothing but legends, old lies for the sake of entertainment.""I didn't understand anything," I told him, though it wasn't entirely true. As if I could discount somethingbecause it was a legend. My life was circled by legend on every side. They were all true.　　"I packed your toothbrush. I'll get it for you."He walked ahead of me to the bedroom.　　"Are we leaving soon?" I called after him.　　"As soon as you're done."He waited for my toothbrush to repack it, pacing silently around the bedroom. I handed it to him when Iwas finished.　　"I'll get the bags into the boat.""Edward—"He turned back. "Yes?"I hesitated, trying to think of some way to get a few seconds alone. "Could you... pack some of thefood? You know, in case I get hungry again.""Of course," he said, his eyes suddenly soft. "Don't worry about anything. We'll get to Carlisle in just afew hours, really. This will all be over soon."I nodded, not trusting my voice.　　He turned and left the room, one big suitcase in each hand.　　I whirled and scooped up the phone he'd left on the counter. It was very unlike him to forget things—toforget that Gustavo was coming, to leave his phone lying here. He was so stressed he was barely himself.　　I flipped it open and scrolled through the preprogrammed numbers. I was glad he had the sound turnedoff, afraid that he would catch me. Would he be at the boat now? Or back already? Would he hear mefrom the kitchen if I whispered?　　I found the number I wanted, one I had never called before in my life. I pressed the "send" button andcrossed my fingers.　　"Hello?" the voice like golden wind chimes answered.　　"Rosalie?" I whispered. "It's Bella. Please. You have to help me."BOOK TWOJacobAnd yet, to say the truth, reason and love keep little company together nowadays.　　William ShakespeareA Midsummer Night's DreamAct III, Scene iPREFACE Life sucks, and then you die.　　Yeah, I should be so lucky.
    Chapter 8 Waiting For The Damn Fight To Start Already
    "Jeez, Paul, don't you freaking have a home of your own?"Paul, lounging across my whole couch, watching some stupid baseball game on my crappy TV, justgrinned at me and then—real slow—he lifted one Dorito from the bag in his lap and wedged it into hismouth in one piece.　　"You betterVe brought those with you."Crunch. "Nope," he said while chewing. "Your sister said to go ahead and help myself to anything Iwanted."I tried to make my voice sound like I wasn't about to punch him. "Is Rachel here now?"It didn't work. He heard where I was going and shoved the bag behind his back. The bag crackled as hesmashed it into the cushion. The chips crunched into pieces. Paul's hands came up in fists, close to hisface like a boxer.　　"Bring it, kid. I don't need Rachel to protect me."I snorted. "Right. Like you wouldn't go crying to her first chance."He laughed and relaxed into the sofa, dropping his hands. "I'm not going to go tattle to a girl. If you gotin a lucky hit, that would be just between the two of us. And vice versa, right?"Nice of him to give me an invitation. I made my body slump like I'd given up. "Right."His eyes shifted to the TV.　　I lunged.　　His nose made a very satisfying crunching sound of its own when my fist connected. He tried to grab me,but I danced out of the way before he could find a hold, the ruined bag of Doritos in my left hand.　　"You broke my nose, idiot.""Just between us, right, Paul?"I went to put the chips away. When I turned around, Paul was repositioning his nose before it could setcrooked.　　The blood had already stopped; it looked like it had no source as it trickled down his lips and off hischin. He cussed, wincing as he pulled at the cartilage.　　"You are such a pain, Jacob. I swear, I'd rather hang out with Leah.""Ouch. Wow, I bet Leah's really going to love to hear that you want to spend some quality time with her.　　It'll just warm the cockles of her heart.""You're going to forget I said that.""Of course. I'm sure it won't slip out.""Ugh," he grunted, and then settled back into the couch, wiping the leftover blood on the collar of hist-shirt. "You're fast, kid.I'll give you that." He turned his attention back to the fuzzy game.　　I stood there for a second, and then I stalked off to my room, muttering about alien abductions.　　Back in the day, you could count on Paul for a fight pretty much whenever. You didn't have to hit himthen—any mild insult would do. It didn't take a lot to flip him out of control. Now, of course, when Ireally wanted a good snarling, ripping, break-the-trees-down match, he had to be all mellow.　　Wasn't it bad enough that yet another member of the pack had imprinted—because, really, that madefour of ten now! When would it stop? Stupid myth was supposed to be rare, for crying out loud! All thismandatory love-at-first-sight was completely sickening!　　Did it have to be my sister? Did it have to be Paul?　　When Rachel'd come home from Washington State at the end of the summer semester—graduatedearly, the nerd—my biggest worry'd been that it would be hard keeping the secret around her. I wasn'tused to covering things up in my own home. It made me real sympathetic to kids like Embry and Collin,whose parents didn't know they were werewolves. Embry's mom thought he was going through somekind of rebellious stage. He was permanently grounded for constantly sneaking out, but, of course, therewasn't much he could do about that. She'd check his room every night, and every night it would be emptyagain. She'd yell and he'd take it in silence, and then go through it all again the next day. We'd tried totalk Sam into giving Embry a break and letting his mom in on the gig, but Embry'd said he didn't mind.　　The secret was too important.　　So I'd been all geared up to be keeping that secret. And then, two days after Rachel got home, Paul raninto her on the beach. Bada bing, bada boom—true love! No secrets necessary when you found yourother half, and all that imprinting werewolf garbage.　　Rachel got the whole story. And I got Paul as a brother-in-law someday. I knew Billy wasn't muchthrilled about it, either. But he handled it better than I did. 'Course, he did escape to the Clearwaters'　　more often than usual these days. I didn't see where that was so much better. No Paul, but plenty ofLeah.　　I wondered—would a bullet through my temple actually kill me or just leave a really big mess for me toclean up?　　I threw myself down on the bed. I was tired—hadn't slept since my last patrol—but I knew I wasn'tgoing to sleep. My head was too crazy. The thoughts bounced around inside my skull like a disorientedswarm of bees. Noisy. Now and then they stung. Must be hornets, not bees. Bees died after one sting.　　And the same thoughts were stinging meagain and again.　　This waiting was driving me insane. It had been almost four weeks. I'd expected, one way or another,the news would have come by now. I'd sat up nights imagining what form it would take.　　Charlie sobbing on the phone—Bella and her husband lost in an accident. A plane crash? That would behard to fake. Unless the leeches didn't mind killing a bunch of bystanders to authenticate it, and whywould they? Maybe a small plane instead. They probably had one of those to spare.　　Or would the murderer come home alone, unsuccessful in his attempt to make her one of them? Or noteven getting that far. Maybe he'd smashed her like a bag of chips in his drive to get some? Because herlife was less important to him than his own pleasure...　　The story would be so tragic—Bella lost in a horrible accident. Victim of a mugging gone wrong.　　Choking to death at dinner. A car accident, like my mom. So common. Happened all the time.　　Would he bring her home? Bury her here for Charlie? Closed-casket ceremony, of course. My mom'scoffin had been nailed shut...　　I could only hope that he'd come back here, within my reach.　　Maybe there would be no story at all. Maybe Charlie would call to ask my dad if he'd heard anythingfrom Dr. Cullen, who just didn't show up to work one day. The house abandoned. No answer on any ofthe Cullens' phones. The mystery picked up by some second-rate news program, foul play suspected...　　Maybe the big white house would burn to the ground, everyone trapped inside. Of course, they'd needbodies for that one. Eight humans of roughly the right size. Burned beyond recognition—beyond the helpof dental records.　　Either of those would be tricky—for me, that is. It would be hard to find them if they didn't want to befound. Of course, I had forever to look. If you had forever, you could check out every single piece ofstraw in the haystack, one by one, to see if it was the needle.　　Right now, I wouldn't mind dismantling a haystack. At least that would be something to do. I hatedknowing that I could be losing my chance. Giving the bloodsuckers the time to escape, if that was theirplan.　　We could go tonight. We could kill every one of them that we could find.　　I liked that plan because I knew Edward well enough to know that, if I killed any one of his coven, Iwould get my chance at him, too. He'd come for revenge. And I'd give it to him—I wouldn't let mybrothers take him down as a pack. It would be just him and me. May the better man win.　　But Sam wouldn't hear of it. We're not going to break the treaty. Let them make the breach. Justbecause we had no proof that the Cullens had done anything wrong. Yet. You had to add the yet,because we all knew it was inevitable. Bella was either coming back one of them, or not coming back.　　Either way, a human life had been lost. And that meant game on.　　In the other room, Paul brayed like a mule. Maybe he'd switched to a comedy. Maybe the commercialwas funny. Whatever. It grated on my nerves.　　I thought about breaking his nose again. But it wasn't Paul I wanted to fight with. Not really.　　I tried to listen to other sounds, the wind in the trees, it wasn't the same, not through human ears. Therewere a million voices in the wind that I couldn't hear in this body.　　But these ears were sensitive enough. I could hear past the trees, to the road, the sounds of the carscoming around that last bend where you could finally see the beach—the vista of the islands and therocks and the big blue ocean stretching to the horizon. The La Push cops liked to hang out right aroundthere. Tourists never noticed the reduced speed limit sign on the other side of the road.　　I could hear the voices outside the souvenir shop on the beach. I could hear the cowbell clanging as thedoor opened and closed. I could hear Embry's mom at the cash register, printing out a receipt.　　I could hear the tide raking across the beach rocks. I could hear the kids squeal as the icy water rushedin too fast for them to get out of the way. I could hear the moms complain about the wet clothes. And Icould hear a familiar voice....　　I was listening so hard that the sudden burst of Paul's donkey laugh made me jump half off the bed.　　"Get out of my house," I grumbled. Knowing he wouldn't pay any attention, I followed my own advice. Iwrenched open my window and climbed out the back way so that I wouldn't see Paul again. It would betoo tempting. I knew I would hit him again, and Rachel was going to be pissed enough already. She'd seethe blood on his shirt, and she'd blame me right away without waiting for proof. Of course, she'd be right,but still.　　I paced down to the shore, my fists in my pockets. Nobody looked at me twice when I went through thedirt lot by First Beach. That was one nice thing about summer—no one cared if you wore nothing butshorts.　　I followed the familiar voice I'd heard and found Quil easy enough. He was on the south end of thecrescent, avoiding the bigger part of the tourist crowd. He kept up a constant stream of warnings.　　"Keep out of the water, Claire. C'mon. No, don't. Oh! Nice, kid. Seriously, do you want Emily to yell atme? I'm not bringing you back to the beach again if you don't—Oh yeah? Don't—ugh. You think that'sfunny, do you? Hah! Who's laughing now, huh?"He had the giggling toddler by the ankle when I reached them. She had a bucket in one hand, and herjeans were drenched. He had a huge wet mark down the front of his t-shirt.　　"Five bucks on the baby girl," I said.　　"Hey, Jake."Claire squealed and threw her bucket at Quil's knees. "Down, down!"He set her carefully on her feet and she ran to me. She wrapped her arms around my leg.　　"UncaJay!""How's it going, Claire?"She giggled. "Qwil aaaaawl wet now.""I can see that. Where's your mama?""Gone, gone, gone," Claire sang, "Cwaire pway wid Qwil aaaawl day. Cwaire nebber gowin home."She let go of me and ran to Quil. He scooped her up and slung her onto his shoulders.　　"Sounds like somebody's hit the terrible twos.""Threes actually," Quil corrected. "You missed the party. Princess theme. She made me wear a crown,and then Emily suggested they all try out her new play makeup on me.""Wow, I'm really sorry I wasn't around to see that.""Don't worry, Emily has pictures. Actually, I look pretty hot.""You're such a patsy."Quil shrugged. "Claire had a great time. That was the point."I rolled my eyes. It was hard being around imprinted people. No matter what stage they were in—aboutto tie the knot like Sam or just a much-abused nanny like Quil—the peace and certainty they alwaysradiated was downright puke-inducing.　　Claire squealed on his shoulders and pointed at the ground. "Pity wock, Qwil! For me, for me!""Which one, kiddo? The red one?""No wed!"Quil dropped to his knees—Claire screamed and pulled his hair like a horse's reigns.　　"This blue one?""No, no, no...," the little girl sang, thrilled with her new game.　　The weird part was, Quil was having just as much fun as she was. He didn't have that face on that somany of the tourist dads and moms were wearing—the when-is-nap-time? face. You never saw a realparent so jazzed to play whatever stupid kiddie sport their rugrat could think up. I'd seen Quil playpeekaboo for an hour straight without getting bored.　　And I couldn't even make fun of him for it—I envied him too much.　　Though I did think it sucked that he had a good fourteen years of monkitude ahead of him until Clairewas his age—for Quil, at least, it was a good thing werewolves didn't get older. But even all that timedidn't seem to bother him much.　　"Quil, you ever think about dating?" I asked.　　"Huh?""No, no yewwo!" Claire crowed.　　"You know. A real girl. I mean, just for now, right? On your nights off babysitting duty."Quil stared at me, his mouth hanging open.　　"Pity wock! Pity wock!" Claire screamed when he didn't offer her another choice. She smacked him onthe head with her little fist.　　"Sorry, Claire-bear. How about this pretty purple one?""No," she giggled. "No poopoh.""Give me a clue. I'm begging, kid."Claire thought it over. "Gween," she finally said.　　Quil stared at the rocks, studying them. He picked four rocks in different shades of green, and offeredthem to her.　　"Did I get it?'7"Yay!""Which one?"Vlaaaaw/obdem!!"She cupped her hands and he poured the small rocks into them. She laughed and immediately clunkedhim on the head with them. He winced theatrically and then got to his feet and started walking back uptoward the parking lot. Probably worried about her getting cold in her wet clothes. He was worse thanany paranoid, overprotective mother.　　"Sorry if I was being pushy before, man, about the girl thing," I said.　　"Naw, that's cool," Quil said. "It kind of took me by surprise is all. I hadn't thought about it.""I bet she'd understand. You know, when she's grown up. She wouldn't get mad that you had a life whileshe was in diapers.""No, I know. I'm sure she'd understand that."He didn't say anything else.　　"But you won't do that, will you?" I guessed.　　"I can't see it," he said in a low voice. "I can't imagine. I just don't... see anyone that way. I don't noticegirls anymore, you know. I don't see their faces.""Put that together with the tiara and makeup, and maybe Claire will have a different kind of competitionto worry about."Quil laughed and made kissing noises at me. "You available this Friday, Jacob?""You wish," I said, and then I made a face. "Yeah, guess I am, though."He hesitated a second and then said, "You ever think about dating?"I sighed. Guess I'd opened myself up for that one.　　"You know, Jake, maybe you should think about getting a life."He didn't say it like a joke. His voice was sympathetic. That made it worse.　　"I don't see them, either, Quil. I don't see their faces."Quil sighed, too.　　Far away, too low for anyone but just us two to hear it over the waves, a howl rose out of the forest.　　"Dang, that's Sam," Quil said. His hands flew up to touch Claire, as if making sure she was still there. "Idon't know where her mom's at!"Til see what it is. If we need you, HI let you know." I raced through the words. They came out allslurred together. "Hey, why don't you take her up to the Clearwaters'? Sue and Billy can keep an eye onher if they need to. They might know what's going on, anyway.""Okay—get outta here, Jake!"I took off running, not for the dirt path through the weedy hedge, but in the shortest line toward theforest. I hurdled the first line of driftwood and then ripped my way through the briars, still running. I feltthe little tears as the thorns cut into my skin, but I ignored them. Their sting would be healed before Imade the trees.　　I cut behind the store and darted across the highway. Somebody honked at me. Once in the safety ofthe trees, I ran faster, taking longer strides. People would stare if I was out in the open. Normal peoplecouldn't run like this. Sometimes I thought it might be fun to enter a race—you know, like the Olympictrials or something. It would be cool to watch the expressions on those star athletes' faces when I blewby them. Only I was pretty sure the testing they did to make sure you weren't on steroids would probablyturn up some really freaky crap in my blood.　　As soon as I was in the true forest, unbound by roads or houses, I skidded to a stop and kicked myshorts off. With quick, practiced moves, I rolled them up and tied them to the leather cord around myankle. As I was still pulling the ends tight, I started shifting. The fire trembled down my spine, throwingtight spasms out along my arms and legs. It only took a second. The heat flooded through me, and I feltthe silent shimmer that made me something else. I threw my heavy paws against the matted earth andstretched my back in one long, rolling extension.　　Phasing was very easy when I was centered like this. I didn't have issues with my temper anymore.　　Except when it got in the way.　　For one half second, I remembered the awful moment at that unspeakable joke of a wedding. I'd beenso insane with fury that I couldn't make my body work right. I'd been trapped, shaking and burning,unable to make the change and kill the monster just a few feet away from me. It had been so confusing.　　Dying to kill him. Afraid to hurt her. My friends in the way. And then, when I was finally able to take theform I wanted, the order from my leader. The edict from the Alpha. If it had been just Embry and Quilthere that night without Sam... would I have been able to kill the murderer, then?　　I hated it when Sam laid down the law like that. I hated the feeling of having no choice. Of having toobey.　　And then I was conscious of an audience. I was not alone in my thoughts.　　So self-absorbed all the time,Leah thought.　　Yeah, no hypocrisy there, Leah,I thought back.　　Can it, guys,Sam told us.　　We fell silent, and I felt Leah's wince at the word guys. Touchy, like always.　　Sam pretended not to notice. Where's Quil andJared?　　Quit's got Claire. He's taking her to the Clearwaters'.　　Good. Sue will take her.　　Jared was going to Kim's,Embry thought. Good chance he didn't hear you.　　There was a low grumble through the pack. I moaned along with them. When Jared finally showed up,no doubt he'd still be thinking about Kim. And nobody wanted a replay of what they were up to rightnow.　　Sam sat back on his haunches and let another howl rip into the air. It was a signal and an order in one.　　The pack was gathered a few miles east of where I was. I loped through the thick forest toward them.　　Leah,Embry, and Paul all were working in toward them, too. Leah was close—soon I could hear her footfallsnot far into the woods. We continued in a parallel line, choosing not to run together.　　Well, we're not waiting all day for him. He'll just have to catch up later.　　'Sup, boss?Paul wanted to know.　　We need to talk. Something's happened.　　I felt Sam's thoughts flicker to me—and not just Sam's, but Seth's and Collin's and Brady's as well.　　Collin and Brady—the new kids—had been running patrol with Sam today, so they would knowwhatever he knew. I didn't know why Seth was already out here, and in the know. It wasn't his turn.　　Seth, tell them what you heard.　　I sped up, wanting to be there. I heard Leah move faster, too. She hated being outrun. Being the fastestwas the only edge she claimed.　　Claimthis, moron, she hissed, and then she really kicked it into gear. I dug my nails into the loam andshot myself forward.　　Sam didn't seem in the mood to put up with our usual crap. Jake, Leah, give it a rest.　　Neither of us slowed.　　Sam growled, but let it go. Seth?　　Charlie called around till he found Billy at my house.　　Yeah, I talked to him,Paul added.　　I felt a jolt go through me as Seth thought Charlie's name. This was it. The waiting was over. I ran faster,forcing myself to breathe, though my lungs felt kinda stiff all of a sudden.　　Which story would it be?　　So he's all flipped out. Guess Edward and Bella got home last week, and...　　My chest eased up.　　She was alive. Or she wasn't dead dead, at least.　　I hadn't realized how much difference it would make to me. I'd been thinking of her as dead this wholetime, and I only saw that now. I saw that I'd never believed that he would bring her back alive. Itshouldn't matter, because I knew what was coming next.　　Yeah, bro, and here's the bad news. Charlie talked to her, said she sounded bad. She told him she'ssick. Carlisle got on and told Charlie that Bella picked up some rare disease in South America. Said she'squarantined. Charlie's going crazy, 'cause even he's not allowed to see her. He says he doesn't care if hegets sick, but Carlisle wouldn't bend. No visitors. Told Charlie it was pretty serious, but that he's doingeverything he can. Charlie's been stewing about it for days, but he only called Billy now. He said shesounded worse today.　　The mental silence when Seth finished was profound. We all understood.　　So she would die of this disease, as far as Charlie knew. Would they let him view the corpse? The pale,perfectly still, unbreathing white body? They couldn't let him touch the cold skin—he might notice howhard it was.　　They'd have to wait until she could hold still, could keep from killing Charlie and the other mourners.　　How long would that take?　　Would they bury her? Would she dig herself out, or would the bloodsuckers come for her?　　The others listened to my speculating in silence. I'd put a lot more thought into this than any of them.　　Leah and I entered the clearing at nearly the same time. She was sure her nose led the way, though. Shedropped onto her haunches beside her brother while I trotted forward to stand at Sam's right hand. Paulcircled and made room for me in my place.　　Beatcha again,Leah thought, but I barely heard her.　　I wondered why I was the only one on my feet. My fur stood up on my shoulders, bristling withimpatience.　　Well, what are we waiting for?I asked.　　No one said anything, but I heard their feelings of hesitation.　　Oh, come on! The treaty's broken!　　We have no proof —maybe sheis sick....　　OH, PLEASE!　　Okay, so the circumstantial evidence is pretty strong. Still... Jacob.Sam's thought came slow, hesitant.　　Are you sure this is what you want? Is it really the right thing? We all know what she wanted.　　The treaty doesn't mention anything about victim preferences, Sam!　　Is she really a victim? Would you label her that way?　　Yes!　　Jake,Seth thought, they aren't our enemies.　　Shut up, kid! Just 'cause you've got some kind of sick hero worship thing going on with thatbloodsucker, it doesn't change the law. They are our enemies. They are in our territory. We take themout. I don't care if you had fun fighting alongside Edward Cullen once upon a time.　　So what are you going to do when Bella fights with them, Jacob? Huh?Seth demanded.　　She's not Bella anymore.　　You gonna be the one to take her down?　　I couldn't stop myself from wincing.　　No, you're not. So, what? You gonna make one of us do it? And then hold a grudge against whoever itis forever?　　I wouldn't...　　Sure you won't. You're not ready for this fight, Jacob.　　Instinct took over and I crouched forward, snarling at the gangly sand-colored wolf across the circle.　　Jacob!Sam cautioned. Seth, shut up for a second.　　Seth nodded his big head.　　Dang, what'd I miss? Qu\thought. He was running for the gathering place full-out. Heard aboutCharlie's call....　　Were getting ready to go,I told him. Why don't you swing by Kim's and drag Jared out with yourteeth? We're going to need everyone.　　Come straight here, Quil,Sam ordered. We've decided nothing yet.　　I growled.　　Jacob, I have to think about what's best for this pack. I have to choose the course that protects you allbest. Times have changed since our ancestors made that treaty. I... well, I don't honestly believe that theCullens are a danger to us. And we know that they will not be here much longer. Surely once they've toldtheir story, they will disappear. Our lives can return to normal.　　Normal?　　If we challenge them, Jacob, they will defend themselves well.　　Are you afraid?　　Are you so ready to losea brother? He paused. Or a sister? he tacked on as an afterthought.　　I'm not afraid to die.　　I know that, Jacob. It's one reason I question your judgment on this.　　I stared into his black eyes. Do you intend to honor our fathers' treaty or not?　　I honor my pack. I do what's best for them.　　Coward.　　His muzzle tensed, pulling back over his teeth.　　Enough, Jacob. You're overruled.Sam's mental voice changed, took on that strange double timbre thatwe could not disobey. The voice of the Alpha. He met the gaze of every wolf in the circle.　　The pack is not attacking the Cullens without provocation. The spirit of the treaty remains. They are notadanger to our people, nor are they a danger to the people of Forks. Bella Swan made an informedchoice, and we are not going to punish our former allies for her choice.　　Hear, hear,Seth thought enthusiastically.　　/ thought I told you to shut it, Seth.　　Oops. Sorry, Sam.　　Jacob, where do you think you're going?　　I left the circle, moving toward the west so that I could turn my back on him. I'm going to tell myfather goodbye. Apparently there was no purpose in me sticking around this long.　　Aw, Jake— don't do that again!　　Shut up, Seth,several voices thought together.　　We don't want you to leave,Sam told me, his thought softer than before.　　So force me to stay, Sam. Take away my will. Make me a slave.　　You know I won't do thatThen there's nothing more to say.　　I ran away from them, trying very hard not to think about what was next. Instead, I concentrated on mymemories of the long wolf months, of letting the humanity bleed out of me until I was more animal thanman. Living in the moment, eating when hungry, sleeping when tired, drinking when thirsty, and running—running just to run. Simple desires, simple answers to those desires. Pain came in easily managedforms. The pain of hunger. The pain of cold ice under your paws. The pain of cutting claws when dinnergot feisty. Each pain had a simple answer, a clear action to end that pain.　　Not like being human.　　Yet, as soon as I was in jogging distance of my house, I shifted back into my human body. I needed tobe able to think in privacy.　　I untied my shorts and yanked them on, already running for the house.　　I'd done it. I'd hidden what I was thinking and now it was too late for Sam to stop me. He couldn't hearme now.　　Sam had made a very clear ruling. The pack would not attack the Cullens. Okay.　　He hadn't mentioned an individual acting alone.　　Nope, the pack wasn't attacking anyone today.　　But I was.
    Chapter 11 The Two Things
    THE TWO THINGS AT THE VERY TOP OF MY THINGS-I-NEVER-WANT-TO-DO LISTSam started moving the others into formation while i was still on the ground. Embry and Quil were at mysides, waiting for me to recover and take the point.　　I could feel the drive, the need, to get on my feet and lead them. The compulsion grew, and I fought ituselessly, cringing on the ground where I was.　　Embry whined quietly in my ear. He didn't want to think the words, afraid that he would bring me toSam's attention again. I felt his wordless plea for me to get up, for me to get this over with and be donewith it.　　There was fear in the pack, not so much for self but for the whole. We couldn't imagine that we wouldall make it out alive tonight. Which brothers would we lose? Which minds would leave us forever? Whichgrieving families would we be consoling in the morning?　　My mind began to work with theirs, to think in unison, as we dealt with these fears. Automatically, Ipushed up from the ground and shook out my coat.　　Embry and Quil huffed in relief. Quil touched his nose to my side once.　　Their minds were filled with our challenge, our assignment. We remembered together the nights we'dwatched the Cullens practicing for the fight with the newborns. Emmett Cullen was strongest, but Jasperwould be the bigger problem. He moved like a lightning strike—power and speed and death rolled intoone. How many centuries' experience did he have? Enough that all the other Cullens looked to him forguidance.　　/'// take point, if you want flank, Quil offered. There was more excitement in his mind than most of theothers. When Quil had watched Jasper's instruction those nights, he'd been dying to test his skill againstthe vampire's. For him, this would be a contest. Even knowing it was his life on the line, he saw it thatway. Paul was like that, too, and the kids who had never been in battle, Collin and Brady. Seth probablywould've been the same—if the opponents were not his friends.　　Jake?Quil nudged me. How do you want to roll?　　I just shook my head, t couldn't concentrate—the compulsion to follow orders felt like puppet stringshooked intoall of my muscles. One foot forward, now another.　　Seth was dragging behind Collin and Brady—Leah had assumed point there. She ignored Seth whileplanning with the others, and I could see that she'd rather leave him out of the fight.There was a maternaledge to her feelings for her younger brother. She wished Sam would send him home. Seth didn't registerLeah's doubts. He was adjusting to the puppet strings, too.　　Maybe if you stopped resisting...,Embry whispered.　　Just focus on our part. The big ones. We can take them down. We own them!Quil was working himselfup—like a pep talk before a big game.　　I could see how easy it would be—to think about nothing more than my part. It wasn't hard to imagingattacking Jasper and Emmett. We'd been close to that before. I'd thought of them as enemies for a verylong time. I could do that now again.　　I just had to forget that they were protecting the same thing I would protect. I had to forget the reasonwhy I might want them to win....　　Jake,Embry warned. Keep your head in the game.　　My feet moved sluggishly, pulling against the drag of the strings.　　There's no point fighting it,Embry whispered again.　　He was right. I would end up doing what Sam wanted, if he was willing to push it. And he was.　　Obviously.　　There was a good reason for the Alpha's authority. Even a pack as strong as ours wasn't much of aforce without a leader. We had to move together, to think together, in order to be effective. And thatrequired the body to have a head.　　So what if Sam was wrong now? There was nothing anyone could do. No one could dispute hisdecision.　　Except.　　And there it was—a thought I'd never, never wanted to have. But now, with my legs all tied up in strings,I recognized the exception with relief—more than relief, with a fierce joy.　　No one could dispute the Alpha's decision—except for me.　　I hadn't earned anything. But there were things that had been born in me, things that I'd left unclaimed.　　I'd never wanted to lead the pack. I didn't want to do it now. I didn't want the responsibility for all ourfates resting on my shoulders. Sam was better at that than I would ever be.　　But he was wrong tonight.　　And I had not been born to kneel to him.　　The bonds fell off my body the second that I embraced my birthright.　　I could feel it gathering in me, both a freedomand also a strange, hollow power.Hollow because anAlpha's power came from his pack, and I had no pack. For a second, loneliness overwhelmed me.　　I had no pack now.　　But I was straight and strong as I walked to where Sam stood, planning with Paul and Jared. He turnedat the sound of my advance, and his black eyes narrowed.　　A/o, I told him again.　　He heard it right away, heard the choice that I'd made in the sound of the Alpha voice in my thoughts.　　He jumped back a half step with a shocked yelp.　　Jacob? What have you done?　　I won't follow you, Sam. Not for something so wrong.　　He stared at me, stunned. You would... you would choose your enemies over your family?　　They aren't—I shook my head, clearing it— they aren't our enemies. They never have been. Until Ireally thought about destroying them, thought it through, I didn't see that.　　This isn't about them,he snarled at me. This is about Bella. She has never been the one for you, shehas never chosen you, but you continue to destroy your life for her!　　They were hard words, but true words. I sucked in a big gulp of air, breathing them in.　　Maybe you're right. But you're going to destroy the pack over her, Sam. No matter how many of themsurvive tonight, they will always have murder on their hands.　　We have to protect our families!　　I know what you've decided, Sam. But you don't decide for me, not anymore.　　Jacob— you can't turn your back on the tribe.　　I heard the double echo of his Alpha command, but it was weightless this time. It no longer applied tome. He clenched his jaw, trying to force me to respond to his words.　　I stared into his furious eyes. Ephraim Black's son was not born to follow Levi Uley's.　　Is this it, then, JacobBlack? His hackles rose and his muzzle pulled back from his teeth. Paul and Jaredsnarled and bristled at his sides. Even if you can defeat me, the pack will never follow you!　　Now /jerked back, a surprised whine escaping my throat.　　Defeat you? I'm not going to fight you, Sam.　　Then what's your plan? I'm not stepping aside so that you can protect the vampire spawn at the tribe'sexpense.　　I'm not telling you to step aside.　　If you order them to follow you—/'// never take anyone's will away from him.　　His tail whipped back and forth as he recoiled from the judgment in my words. Then he took a stepforward so that we were toe to toe, his exposed teeth inches from mine. I hadn't noticed till this momentthat I'd grown taller than him.　　There cannot be more than one Alpha. The pack has chosen me. Will you rip us apart tonight? Will youturn on yourbrothers? Or will you end this insanity and join us again?Every word was layered with command, but itcouldn't touch me. Alpha blood ran undiluted in my veins.　　Icould see why there was never more than one Alpha male in a pack. My body was responding to thechallenge. I could feel the instinct to defend my claim rising in me. The primitive core of my wolf-selftensed for the battle of supremacy.　　I focusedall my energy to control that reaction. I would not fall into a pointless, destructive fight withSam. He was my brother still, even though I was rejecting him.　　There is only one Alpha for this pack. I'm not contesting that I'm just choosing to go my own way.　　Do you belong to acoven now, Jacob?　　I flinched.　　/ don't know, Sam. But I do know this—He shrunk back as he felt the weight of the Alpha in my tone. It affected him more than his touched me.　　Because I had been born to lead him.　　/ will stand between you and the Cullens. I won't just watch while the pack kills innocent—it washard to apply that word to vampires, but it was true— people. The pack is better than that. Leadthem in the right direction, Sam.　　I turned my back on him, and a chorus of howls tore into the air around me.　　Digging my nails into the earth, I raced away from the uproar I'd caused. I didn't have much time. Atleast Leah was the only one with a prayer of outrunning me, and I had a head start.　　The howling faded with the distance, and I took comfort as the sound continued to rip apart the quietnight. They weren't after me yet.　　I had to warn the Cullens before the pack could get it together and stop me. If the Cullens wereprepared,it might give Sam a reason to rethink this before it was too late. I sprinted toward the whitehouse Istill hated, leaving my home behindme. Home didn't belong to me anymore. I'd turned my backon it.　　Today had begun like any other day. Made it home from patrol with the rainy sunrise, breakfast withBilly and Rachel, bad TV, bickering withPaul... How did it change so completely, turn all surreal? Howdid everything get messed up and twisted so that I was here now, all alone, an unwilling Alpha, cut offfrom my brothers, choosing vampires over them?　　The sound I'd been fearing interrupted my dazed thoughts—it was the soft impact of big paws againstthe ground, chasing after me. I threw myself forward, rocketing through the black forest. I just had to getclose enough so that Edward could hear the warning in my head. Leah wouldn't be able to stop mealone.　　And then I caught the mood of the thoughts behind me. Not anger, but enthusiasm. Not chasing... butfollowing.　　My stride broke. I staggered two steps before it evened out again.　　Wait up. My legs aren't as long as yours.　　SETH! What do you think you're DOING? GO HOME!　　He didn't answer, but I could feel his excitement as he kept right on after me. I could see through hiseyes as hecould see through mine. The night scene was bleak for me—fullof despair. For him, it was hopeful.　　I hadn't realized I was slowing down, but suddenly he was on my flank, running in position beside me.　　/ am not joking, Seth! This is no place for you. Get out of here.　　The gangly tan wolf snorted. I've got your back, Jacob. I think you're right. And I'm not going tostand behind Sam when—Oh yes you are the hell going to stand behind Sam! Get your furry butt back to La Push and do whatSam tells you to do.　　No.　　Go, Seth!　　Is that anorder. Jacob?　　His question brought me up short. I skidded to a halt, my nails gouging furrows in the mud.　　I'm not ordering anyone to do anything. I'm just telling you what you already know.　　He plopped down on his haunches beside me. /'// tell you what I know —I know that it's awful quiet.　　Haven't you noticed?　　I blinked. My tail swished nervously as I realized what he was thinking underneath the words. It wasn'tquiet in one sense. Howls still filled the air, far away in the west.　　They haven't phased back,Seth said.　　I knew that. The pack would be on red alert now. They would be using the mind link to see all sidesclearly. But I couldn't hear what they were thinking. I could only hear Seth. No one else.　　Looks to me like separate packs aren't linked. Huh. Guess there was no reason for our fathers to knowthat before. 'Cause there was no reason for separate packs before. Never enough wolves for two. Wow.　　It'sreally quiet. Sort of eerie. But also kinda nice, don't you think? I bet it was easier, like this, forEphraim and Quil and Levi. Not such a babble with just three. Or just two.　　Shut up, Seth.　　Yes, sir.　　Stop that! There are not two packs. There is THE pack, and then there is me. That's all. So you can gohome now.　　If there aren't two packs, then why can we hear each other and not the rest? I think that when youturned your back on Sam, that was a pretty significant move. A change. And when I followed you away,I think that was significant, too.　　You've got a point,I conceded. But what can change can change right back.　　He got up and started trotting toward the east. No time to argue about it now. We should be movingright along before Sam...　　He was right about that part. There was no time for this argument. Ifell into a run again, not pushingmyself quite as hard. Seth stayed on my heels, holding the Second's traditional place on my right flank.　　/ can run somewhere else, he thought, his nose dipping a little. / didn't follow you because I was aftera promotion.　　Run wherever you want. Makes no difference to me.　　There was no sound of pursuit, but we both stepped it up a little at the same time. I was worried now. IfI couldn't tap into the pack's mind, it was going to make this more difficult. I'd have no more advancewarning of attack than the Cullens.　　We'll run patrols,Seth suggested.　　And what do we do if the pack challenges us?My eyes tightened. Attack our brothers? Your sister?　　No— we sound the alarm and fall back.　　Good answer. But then what? I don't think...　　I know,he agreed. Less confident now. / don't think I can fight them, either. But they won't be anyhappier with the idea of attacking us than we are with attacking them. That might be enough tostop them right there. Pius, there're only eight of them now.　　Stop being so...Took me a minute to decide on the right word. Optimistic. It's getting on my nerves.　　No problem. You want me to be all doom and gloom, or just shut up?　　Just shut up.　　Can do.　　Really? Doesn't seem like it.　　He was finally quiet.　　And then we were across the road and moving through the forest that ringed the Cullens' house. CouldEdward hear us yet?　　Maybe we should be thinking something like,'We come in peace."Go for itEdward?He called the name tentatively. Edward, you there? Okay, now I feel kinda stupid.　　You sound stupid, too.　　Think he can hear us?　　We were less than a mile out now. / think so. Hey, Edward. If you can hear me— circle the wagons,bloodsucker. You've got a problem.　　We've got a problem, Seth corrected.　　Then we broke through the trees into the big lawn. The house was dark, but not empty. Edward stoodon the porch between Emmett and Jasper. They were snow white in the pale light.　　"Jacob? Seth? What's going on?"I slowed and then paced back a few steps. The smell was so sharp through this nose that it felt like itwas honestly burning me. Seth whined quietly, hesitating, and then he fell back behind me.　　To answer Edward's question, I let my mind run over the confrontation with Sam, moving through itbackward. Seth thought with me, filling in the gaps, showing the scene from another angle. We stoppedwhen we got to the partabout the "abomination," because Edward hissed furiously and leaped off the porch.　　"They want to kill Bella?" he snarled flatly.　　Emmett and Jasper, not having heard the first part of the conversation, took his inflectionless question fora statement. They were right next to him in a flash, teeth exposed as they moved on us.　　Hey, now,Seth thought, backing away.　　"Em, Jazz—not theml The others. The pack is coming."Emmett and Jasper rocked back on their heels; Emmett turned to Edward while Jasper kept his eyeslocked on us.　　"What's their problem?" Emmett demanded.　　"The same one as mine," Edward hissed. "But they have their own plan to handle it. Get the others. CallCarlisle! He and Esme have to get back here now."I whined uneasily. They were separated.　　"They aren't far," Edward said in the same dead voice as before.　　I'm going to go take a look,Seth said. Run the western perimeter.　　"Will you be in danger, Seth?" Edward asked.　　Seth and I exchanged a glance.　　Don't think so,we thought together. And then I added, But maybe I should go. Just in case...　　They'll be less likely to challenge me,Seth pointed out. I'm just a kid to them.　　You're just a kid to me, kid.　　I'm outta here. You need to coordinate with the Cullens.　　He wheeled and darted into the darkness. I wasn't going to order Seth around, so I let him go.　　Edward and I stood facing each other in the dark meadow, i could hear Emmett muttering into hisphone. Jasper was watching the place where Seth had vanished into the woods. Alice appeared on theporch and then, after staring at me with anxious eyes for a long moment, she flitted to Jasper's side. Iguessed that Rosalie was inside with Bella. Still guarding her—from the wrong dangers.　　"This isn't the first time I've owed you my gratitude, Jacob," Edward whispered. "I would never haveasked for this from you."I thought of what he'd asked me for earlier today. When it came to Bella, there were no lines hewouldn't cross. Yeah, you would.　　He thought about it and then nodded. "I suppose you're right about that."I sighed heavily. Well, this isn't the first time that I didn't do it for you.　　"Right," he murmured.　　Sorry I didn't do any good today. Told you she wouldn't listen to me.　　"I know. I never really believed she would. But..."You had to try. I get it. She any better?　　His voice and eyes went hollow. "Worse," he breathed.　　I didn't want to let that word sink in. I was grateful when Alice spoke.　　"Jacob, would you mind switching forms?" Alice asked. "I want to know what's going on."I shook my head at the same time Edward answered.　　"He needs to stay linked to Seth.""Well, then would you be so kind as to tell me what's happening?"He explained in clipped, emotionless sentences. "The pack thinks Bella's become a problem. Theyforesee potential danger from the... from what she's carrying. They feel it's their duty to remove thatdanger. Jacob and Seth disbanded from the pack to warn us. The rest are planning to attack tonight."Alice hissed, leaning away from me. Emmett and Jasper exchanged a glance, and then their eyes rangedacross the trees.　　Nobody out here,Seth reported. All's quiet on the western frontThey may go around.　　I'll make a loop.　　"Carlisle and Esme are on their way," Emmett said. "Twenty minutes, tops.""We should take up a defensive position," Jasper said.　　Edward nodded. "Let's get inside."/'// run perimeter with Seth. If I get too far for you to hear my head, listen for my howl.　　"Iwill."They backed into the house, eyes flickering everywhere. Before they were inside, I turned and rantoward the west.　　I'm still not finding much,Seth told me.　　/'// take half the circle. Move fast— we don't want them to have a chance to sneak past us.　　Seth lurched forward in a sudden burst of speed.　　We ran in silence, and the minutes passed. I listened to the noises around him, double-checking hisjudgment.　　Hey —something coming up fast!he warned me after fifteen minutes of silence.　　On my way!　　Hold your position—/ don't think it's the pack. It sounds different.　　Seth —But he caught the approaching scent on the breeze, and I read it in his mind.　　Vampire. Bet it's Carlisle.　　Seth, fall back. It might be someone else.　　No, it's them. I recognize the scent Hold up, I'm going to phase to explain it to them.　　Seth, I don't think —But he was gone.　　Anxiously, I raced along the western border. Wouldn't it be just peachy if I couldn't take care of Sethfor one freaking night? What if something happened to him on my watch? Leah would shred me intokibble.　　At least the kid kept it short. It wasn't two minutes later when I felt him in my head again.　　Yep, Carlisle and Esme. Boy, were they surprised to see me! They're probably inside by now. Carlislesaid thanks.　　He's a good guy.　　Yeah. That's one of the reasons why we're right about this.　　Hope so.　　Why're you so down, Jake? I'll bet Sam won't bring the pack tonight. He's not going to launch a suicidemission.　　I sighed. It didn't seem to matter, either way.　　Oh. This isn't about Sam so much, is it?　　I made the turn at the end of my patrol. I caught Seth's scent where he'd turned last. We weren't leavingany gaps.　　You think Bella's going to die anyway,Seth whispered.　　Yeah, she is.　　Poor Edward. He must be crazy.　　Literally.　　Edward's name brought other memories boiling to the surface. Seth read them in astonishment.　　And then he was howling. Oh, man! No way! You did not/ That just plain oT sucks rocks, Jacob!　　And you know it, too! I can't believe you said you'd kill him. What is that? You have to tell him no.　　Shut up, shut up, you idiot! They're going to think the pack is coming!　　Oops!He cut off mid-howl.　　I wheeled and started loping in toward the house. Just keep out of this, Seth. Take the whole circlefor now.　　Seth seethed and I ignored him.　　False alarm, false alarm,I thoughtas I ran closer in. Sorry. Seth is young. He forgets things. No one'sattacking. False alarm.　　When I got to the meadow, I could see Edward staring out of a dark window. I ran in, wanting to besure he got the message.　　There's nothing out there— you got that?　　He nodded once.　　This would be a lot easier if the communication wasn't one way. Then again, I was kinda glad I wasn't inhis head.　　He looked over his shoulder, back into the house, and I saw a shudder run through his whole frame. Hewaved me away without looking in my direction again and then moved out of my view.　　What's going on?　　Like I was going to get an answer.　　I sat very still in the meadow and listened. With these ears, I could almost hear SetlYs soft footfalls,miles out into the forest. It was easy to hear every sound inside the dark house.　　"It was a false alarm," Edward was explaining in that dead voice, just repeating what I'd told him. "Sethwas upset about something else, and he forgot we were listening for a signal. He's very young.""Nice to have toddlers guarding the fort," a deeper voice grumbled. Emmett, I thought.　　"They've done us a great service tonight, Emmett," Carlisle said. "At great personal sacrifice.""Yeah, I know. I'm just jealous. Wish I was out there.""Seth doesn't think Sam will attack now," Edward said mechanically. "Not with us forewarned, andlacking two members of the pack.""What does Jacob think?" Carlisle asked.　　"He'snot as optimistic."No one spoke. There was a quiet dripping sound that I couldn't place. I heard their low breathing—andI could separateBella's from the rest. It was harsher, labored. It hitched and broke in strange rhythms. Icould hear her heart. It seemed... too fast. I paced it against my own heartbeat, but I wasn't sure if thatwas any measure. It wasn't like I was normal.　　"Don't touch her! You'll wake her up," Rosalie whispered.　　Someone sighed.　　"Rosalie," Carlisle murmured.　　"Don't start with me, Carlisle. We let you have your way earlier, but that's all we're allowing."It seemed like Rosalie and Bella were both talking in plurals now. Like they'd formed a pack of theirown.　　I paced quietly in front of the house. Each pass brought me a little closer. The dark windows were like aTV set running in some dull waiting room—it was impossible to keep my eyes off them for long.　　A few more minutes, a few more passes, and my fur was brushing the side of the porch as I paced.　　I couldsee up through the windows—see the top of the walls and the ceiling, the unlit chandelier thathung there. I was tall enough thatall I would have to do was stretch my neck a little... and maybe onepaw up on the edge of the porch....　　I peeked into the big, open front room, expecting to see something very similar to the scene thisafternoon. But it had changed so much that I was confused at first. For a second I thought I'd gotten thewrong room.　　The glass wall was gone—it looked like metal now. And the furniture was all dragged out of the way,withBella curled up awkwardly on a narrow bed in the center of the open space. Not a normalbed—one with rails like in a hospital. Also like a hospital were the monitors strapped to her body, thetubes stuck into her skin. The lights on the monitors flashed, but there was no sound. The dripping noisewas from the IV plugged into her arm—some fluid that was thick and white, not clear.　　She choked a little in her uneasy sleep, and both Edward and Rosalie moved in to hover over her. Herbodyjerked, and she whimpered. Rosalie smoothed her hand across Bella's forehead. Edward's bodystiffened—his back was to me, but his expression must have been something to see, because Emmettwrenched himself between them before there was time to blink. He held his hands up to Edward.　　"Not tonight, Edward. We've got other things to worry about."Edward turned away from them, and he was the burning man again. His eyes met mine for one moment,and then I dropped back to all fours.　　I ran back into the dark forest, running to join Seth, running away from what was behind me.　　Worse. Yes, she was worse.
    Chapter 14 You Know Things Are Bad When You Feel Guilty For Being Rude To Vampires
    When I got back to the house, there was no one waiting outside for my report. Still on alert?　　Everything's cool,I thought tiredly.　　My eyes quickly caught a small change in the now-familiar scene. There was a stack of light-coloredfabric on the bottom step of the porch. I loped over to investigate. Holding my breath, because thevampire smell stuck to the fabric like you wouldn't believe, I nudged the stack with my nose.　　Someone had laid out clothes. Huh. Edward must have caught my moment of irritation as I'd bolted outthe door. Well. That was... nice. And weird.　　I took the clothes gingerly between my teeth—ugh—and carried them back to the trees. Just in case thiswas some joke by the blond psychopath and I had a bunch of girls' stuff here. Bet she'd love to see thelook on my human face as I stood there naked, holding a sundress.　　In the cover of the trees, I dropped the stinking pile and shifted back to human. I shook the clothes out,snapping them against a tree to beat some of the smell from them. They were definitely guy's clothes—tanpants and a white button-down shirt. Neither of them long enough, but they looked like they'd fit aroundme. Must be Emmett's. I rolled the cuffs up on the shirtsleeves, but there wasn't much I could do aboutthe pants. Oh well.　　I had to admit, I felt better with some clothes to my name, even stinky ones that didn't quite fit. It washard not being able to just jet back home and grab another pair of old sweatpants when I needed them.　　The homeless thing again—not having anyplace to go back to. No possessions, either, which wasn'tbothering me too bad now, but would probably get annoying soon.　　Exhausted, I walked slowly up the Cullens' porch steps in my fancy new secondhand clothes buthesitated when I got to the door. Did I knock? Stupid, when they knew I was here. I wondered why noone acknowledged that—toldme either to come in or get lost Whatever. I shrugged and let myself in.　　More changes. The room had shifted back to normal—almost—in the last twenty minutes. The bigflat-screen was on, low volume, showing some chick flick that no one seemed to be watching. Carlisleand Esme stood by the back windows, which were open to the river again. Alice, Jasper, and Emmettwere out of sight, but I heard them murmuring upstairs. Bella was on the couch like yesterday, with justone tube still hooked into her, and an IV hanging behind the back of the sofa. She was wrapped up like aburrito in a couple of thick quilts, so at least they'd listened to me before. Rosalie was cross-legged onthe ground by her head. Edward sat at the other end of the couch with Bella's burrito'ed feet in his lap.　　He looked up when I came in and smiled at me—just a little twitch of his mouth—like something pleasedhim.　　Bella didn't hear me. She only glanced up when he did, and then she smiled, too. With real energy, herwhole face lighting up. I couldn't remember the last time she'd looked so excited to see me.　　What was with her? For crying out loud, she was married] Happily married, too—there was noquestion that she was in love with her vampire past the boundaries of sanity. And hugely pregnant, to topit off.　　So why did she have to be so damn thrilled to see me? Like I'd made her whole freakin' day by walkingthrough the door.　　If she would just not care... Or more than that—really not want me around. It would be so much easierto stay away.　　Edward seemed to be in agreement with my thoughts—we were on the same wavelength so much latelyit was crazy. He was frowning now, reading her face while she beamed at me.　　"They just wanted to talk," I mumbled, my voice dragging with exhaustion. "No attack on the horizon.""Yes," Edward answered. "I heard most of it."That woke me up a little. We'd been a good three miles out. "How?"Tm hearing you more clearly—it's a matter of familiarity and concentration. Also, your thoughts areslightly easier to pick up when you're in your human form. So I caught most of what passed out there.""Oh." It bugged me a little, but for no good reason, so I shrugged it off. "Good. I hate repeating myself.""I'd tell you to go get some sleep," Bella said, "but my guess is that you're going to pass out on the floorin about six seconds, so there's probably no point."It was amazing how much better she sounded, how much stronger she looked. I smelled fresh blood andsaw that the cup was in her hands again. How much blood would it take to keep her going? At somepoint, would they start trotting in the neighbors?　　I headed for the door, counting off the seconds for her as I walked. "One Mississippi... twoMississippi...""Where's the flood, mutt?" Rosalie muttered.　　"You know how you drown a blonde, Rosalie?" I asked without stopping or turning to look at her. "Gluea mirror to the bottom of a pool."I heard Edward chuckle as I pulled the door shut. His mood seemed to improve in exact correlation toBella'shealth.　　"I've already heard that one,'7Rosalie called after me.　　I trudged down the steps, my only goal to drag myself far enough into the trees that the air would bepure again. I planned to ditch the clothes a convenient distance from the house for future use rather thantying them to my leg, so I wouldn't be smelling them, either. As I fumbled with the buttons on the newshirt, I thought randomly about how buttons would never be in style for werewolves.　　I heard the voices while I slogged across the lawn.　　"Where are you going?" Bella asked.　　"There was something I forgot to say to him.""Let Jacob sleep—it can wait."Yes, please, let Jacob sleep.　　"It will only take a moment."I turned slowly. Edward was already out the door. He had an apology in his expression as heapproached me.　　"Jeez, what now?"Tm sorry," he said, and then he hesitated, like he didn't know how to phrase what he was thinking.　　What's on your mind, mind reader?　　"When you were speaking to Sam's delegates earlier," he murmured, "I was giving a play-by-play forCarlisle and Esme and the rest. They were concerned—""Look, we're not dropping our guard. You don't have to believe Sam like we do. We're keeping oureyes open regardless.""No, no, Jacob. Not about that. We trust your judgment. Rather, Esme was troubled by the hardshipsthis is putting your pack through. She asked me to speak to you privately about it."That took me off guard. "Hardships?""The homeless part, particularly. She's very upset that you are all so... bereft."I snorted. Vampire mother hen—bizarre. "We're tough. Tell her not to worry.""She'd still like to do what she can. I got the impression that Leah prefers not to eat in her wolf form?""And?" I demanded.　　"Well, we do have normal human food here, Jacob. Keeping up appearances, and, of course, for Bella.　　Leah is welcome to anything she'd like. All of you are.""I'll pass that along.""Leah hates us.""So?""So try to pass it along in such a way as to make her consider it, if you don't mind.""I'll do what I can.""And then there's the matter of clothes."I glanced down at the ones I was wearing. "Oh yeah. Thanks." It probably wouldn't be good manners tomention how bad they reeked.　　He smiled, just a little. "Well, we're easily able to help out with any needs there. Alice rarely allows us towear the same thing twice. We've got piles of brand-new clothes that are destined for Goodwill, and I'dimagine that Leah is fairly close to Esme's size___""Not sure how she'll feel about bloodsucker castoffs. She's not as practical as I am.""I trust that you can present the offer in the best possible light. As well as the offer for any other physicalobject you might need, or transportation, or anything else at all. And showers, too, since you prefer tosleep outdoors. Please... don't consider yourselves without the benefits of a home."He said the last line softly—not trying to keep quiet this time, but with some kind of real emotion.　　I stared at him for a second, blinking sleepily. "That's, er, nice of you. Tell Esme we appreciate the, uh,thought. But the perimeter cuts through the river in a few places, so we stay pretty clean, thanks.""If you would pass the offer on, regardless.""Sure, sure.""Thank you."I turned away from him, only to stop cold when I heard the low, pained cry from inside the house. Bythe time I looked back, he was already gone.　　What now?　　I followed after him, shuffling like a zombie. Using about the same number of brain cells, too. It didn'tfeel like I had a choice. Something was wrong. I would go see what it was. There would be nothing Icould do. And I would feel worse.　　It seemed inevitable.　　I let myself in again. Bella was panting, curled over the bulge in the center of her body. Rosalie held herwhile Edward, Carlisle, and Esme all hovered. A flicker of motion caught my eye; Alice was at the top ofthe stairs, staring down into the room with her hands pressed to her temples. It was weird—like she wasbarred from entering somehow.　　"Give me a second, Carlisle," Bella panted.　　"Bella," the doctor said anxiously, "I heard something crack. I need to take a look.""Pretty sure"—pant—"it was a rib. Ow. Yep. Right here." She pointed to her left side, careful not totouch.　　It was breaking her bones now.　　"I need to take an X-ray. There might be splinters. We don't want it to puncture anything."Bella took a deep breath. "Okay."Rosalie lifted Bella carefully. Edward seemed like he was going to argue, but Rosalie bared her teeth athim and growled, "I've already got her."So Bella was stronger now, but the thing was, too. You couldn't starve one without starving the other,andhealing worked just the same. No way to win.　　Blondie carried Bella swiftly up the big staircase with Carlisle and Edward right on her heels, none ofthem taking any notice of me standing dumbstruck in the doorway.　　So they had a blood bank and an X-ray machine? Guess the doc brought his work home with him.　　I was too tired to follow them, too tired to move. I leaned back against the wall and then slid to theground. The door was still open, and I pointed my nose toward it, grateful for the clean breeze blowingin. I leaned my head against the jamb and listened.　　I could hear the sound of the X-ray machinery upstairs. Or maybe I just assumed that's what it was. Andthen the lightest of footsteps coming down the stairs. I didn't look to see which vampire it was.　　"Do you want a pillow?" Alice asked me.　　"No," I mumbled. What was with the pushy hospitality? It was creeping me out.　　"That doesn't look comfortable," she observed.　　"S'not.""Why don't you move, then?""Tired. Why aren't you upstairs with the rest of them?" I shot back.　　"Headache," she answered.　　I rolled my head around to look at her.　　Alice was a tiny little thing. 'Bout the size of one of my arms. She looked even smaller now, sort ofhunched in on herself. Her small face was pinched.　　"Vampires get headaches?""Not the normal ones."I snorted. Normal vampires.　　"So how come you're never with Bella anymore?" I asked, making the question an accusation. It hadn'toccurred to me before, because my head had been full of other crap, but it was weird that Alice wasnever around Bella, not since I'd been here. Maybe if Alice were by her side, Rosalie wouldn't be.　　"Thought you two were like this." I twisted two of my fingers together.　　"Like I said"—she curled up on the tile a few feet from me, wrapping her skinny arms around her skinnyknees—"headache.""Bella's giving you a headache?""Yes."I frowned. Pretty sure I was too tired for riddles. I let my head roll back around toward the fresh air andclosed my eyes.　　"Not Bella, really," she amended. "The... fetus."Ah, someone else who felt like I did. It was pretty easy to recognize. She said the word grudgingly, theway Edward did.　　"I can't see it," she told me, though she might have been talking to herself. For all she knew, I wasalready gone. "I can't see anything about it. Just like you."I flinched, and then my teeth ground together. I didn't like being compared to the creature.　　"Bella gets in the way. She's all wrapped around it, so she's... blurry. Like bad reception on a TV—liketrying to focus your eyes on those fuzzy people jerking around on the screen. It's killing my head to watchher. And I can't see more than a few minutes ahead, anyway. The... fetus is too much a part of her future.　　When she first decided... when she knew she wanted it, she blurred right out of my sight. Scared me todeath."She was quiet for a second, and then she added, "I have to admit, it's a relief having you close by—inspite of the wet-dog smell. Everything goes away. Like having my eyes closed. It numbs the headache.""Happy to be of service, ma'am," I mumbled.　　"I wonder what it has in common with you... why you're the same that way."Sudden heat flashed in the center of my bones. I clenched my fists to hold off the tremors.　　"I have nothing in common with that life-sucker," I said through my teeth.　　"Well, there's something there."I didn't answer. The heat was already burning away. I was too dead tired to stay furious.　　"You don't mind if I sit here by you, do you?" she asked.　　"Guess not. Stinks anyway.""Thanks," she said. "This is the best thing for it, I guess, since I can't take aspirin.""Could you keep it down? Sleeping, here."She didn't respond, immediately lapsing into silence. I was out in seconds.　　I was dreaming that I was really thirsty. And there was a big glass of water in front of me—all cold, youcould see the condensation running down the sides. I grabbed the cup and took a huge gulp, only to findout pretty quick that it wasn't water—it was straight bleach. I choked it back out, spewing it everywhere,and a bunch of it blew out of my nose. It burned. My nose was on fire....　　The pain in my nose woke me up enough to remember where I'd fallen asleep. The smell was prettyfierce, considering that my nose wasn't actually inside the house. Ugh. And it was noisy. Someone waslaughing too loud. A familiar laugh, but one that didn't go with the smell. Didn't belong.　　I groaned and opened my eyes. The skies were dull gray—it was daytime, but no clue as to when.　　Maybe close to sunset—it was pretty dark.　　"About time," Blondie mumbled from not too far away. "The chainsaw impersonation was getting a littletired."I rolled over and wrenched myself into a sitting position. In the process, I figured out where the smellwas coming from. Someone had stuffed a wide feather pillow under my face. Probably trying to be nice,I'd guess. Unless it'd been Rosalie.　　Once my face was out of the stinking feathers, I caught other scents. Like bacon and cinnamon, allmixed up with the vampire smell.　　I blinked, taking in the room.　　Things hadn't changed too much, except that now Bella was sitting up in the middle of the sofa, and theIV was gone. Blondie sat at her feet, her head resting against Bella's knees. Still gave me chills to seehow casually they touched her, though I guess that was pretty brain-dead, all things considered. Edwardwas on one side of her, holding her hand. Alice was on the floor, too, like Rosalie. Her face wasn'tpinched up now. And it was easy to see why—she'd found another painkiller.　　"Hey, Jake's coming around!" Seth crowed.　　He was sitting on Bella's other side, his arm slung carelessly over her shoulders, an overflowing plate offood on his lap.　　What the hell?　　"He came to find you," Edward said while I got to my feet. "And Esme convinced him to stay forbreakfast."Seth took in my expression, and he hurried to explain. "Yeah, Jake—I was just checking to see if youwere okay 'cause you didn't ever phase back. Leah got worried. I told her you probably just crashedhuman, but you know how she is. Anyway, they had all this food and, dang,"—he turned toEdward—"man, you can cook""Thank you," Edward murmured.　　I inhaled slowly, trying to unclench my teeth. I couldn't take my eyes off Seth's arm.　　"Bella got cold," Edward said quietly.　　Right. None of my business, anyway. She didn't belong to me.　　Seth heard Edward's comment, looked at my face, and suddenly he needed both hands to eat with. Hetook his arm off Bella and dug in. i walked over to stand a few feet from the couch, still trying to get mybearings.　　"Leah running patrol?" I asked Seth. My voice was still thick with sleep.　　"Yeah," he said as he chewed. Seth had new clothes on, too. They fit him better than mine fit me. "She'son it. No worries. She'll howl if there's anything. We traded off around midnight. I ran twelve hours." Hewas proud of that, and it showed in his tone.　　"Midnight? Wait a minute—what time is it now?""'Bout dawn." He glanced toward the window, checking.　　Well, damn. I'd slept through the rest of the day and the whole night—dropped the ball. "Crap. Sorryabout that, Seth. Really. You shoulda kicked me awake.""Naw, man, you needed some serious sleep. You haven't taken a break since when? Night before yourlast patrol for Sam? Like forty hours? Fifty? You're not a machine, Jake. 'Sides, you didn't miss anythingat all."Nothing at all? I glanced quickly at Bella. Her color was back to the way I remembered it. Pale, but withthe rose undertone. Her lips were pink again. Even her hair looked better—shinier. She saw meappraising and gave me a qrin.　　"How's the rib?" I asked.　　"Taped up nice and tight, i don't even feel it.'7I rolled my eyes. I heard Edward grind his teeth together, and I figured her blow-it-off attitude buggedhim as much at it bugged me.　　"What's for breakfast?" I asked, a little sarcastic. "O negative or AB positive?"She stuck her tongue out at me. Totally herself again. "Omelets," she said, but her eyes darted down,and I saw that her cup of blood was wedged between her leg and Edward's.　　"Go get some breakfast, Jake," Seth said. "There's a bunch in the kitchen. You've got to be empty."I examined the food in his lap. Looked like half a cheese omelet and the last fourth of a Frisbee-sizedcinnamon roll. My stomach growled, but I ignored it.　　"What's Leah having for breakfast?" I asked Seth critically.　　"Hey, I took food to her before I ate anything" he defended himself. "She said she'd rather eat roadkill,but I bet she caves. These cinnamon rolls... " He seemed at a loss for words.　　'Til go hunt with her, then."Seth sighed as I turned to leave.　　"A moment, Jacob?"It was Carlisle asking, so when I turned around again, my face was probably less disrespectful than itwould have been if anyone else had stopped me.　　"Yeah?"Carlisle approached me while Esme drifted off toward the other room. He stopped a few feet away, justa little bit farther away than the normal space between two humans having a conversation. I appreciatedhim giving me my space.　　"Speaking of hunting," he began in a somber tone. "That's going to be an issue for my family. Iunderstand that our previous truce is inoperative at the moment, so I wanted your advice. Will Sam behunting for us outside of the perimeter you've created? We don't want to take a chance with hurting anyof your family—or losing any of ours. If you were in our shoes, how would you proceed?"I leaned away, a little surprised, when he threw it back at me like that. What would I know about beingin a bloodsucker's expensive shoes? But, then again, I did know Sam.　　"It's a risk," I said, trying to ignore the other eyes I felt on me and to talk only to him. "Sam's calmeddown some, but I'm pretty sure that in his head, the treaty is void. As long as he thinks the tribe, or anyother human, is in real danger, he's not going to ask questions first, if you know what I mean. But, with allthat, his priority is going to be La Push. There really aren't enough of them to keep a decent watch on thepeople while putting out hunting parties big enough to do much damage. I'd bet he's keeping it close tohome."Carlisle nodded thoughtfully.　　"So I guess I'd say, go out together, just in case. And probably you should go in the day, 'cause we'd beexpecting night. Traditional vampire stuff. You're fast—go over the mountains and hunt far enough awaythat there's no chance he'd send anyone that far from home.""And leave Bella behind, unprotected?"I snorted. "What are we, chopped liver?"Carlisle laughed, and then his face was serious again. "Jacob, you can't fight against your brothers."My eyes tightened. "I'm not saying it wouldn't be hard, but if they were really coming to kill her—Iwould be able to stop them."Carlisle shook his head, anxious. "No, I didn't mean that you would be... incapable. But that it would bevery wrong. I can't have that on my conscience.""It wouldn't be on yours, Doc. It would be on mine. And I can take it.""No, Jacob. We will make sure that our actions don't make that a necessity." He frowned thoughtfully"We'll go three at a time," he decided after a second. "That's probably the best we can do.""I don't know, Doc. Dividing down the middle isn't the best strategy.""We've got some extra abilities that will even it up. If Edward is one of the three, he'll be able to give usa few miles' radius of safety."We both glanced at Edward. His expression had Carlisle backtracking quickly.　　"I'm sure there are other ways, too," Carlisle said. Clearly, there was no physical need strong enough toget Edward away from Bella now. "Alice, I would imagine you could see which routes would be amistake?""The ones that disappear," Alice said, nodding. "Easy."Edward, who had gone all tense with Carlisle's first plan, loosened up. Bella was staring unhappily atAlice, that little crease between her eyes that she got when she was stressed out.　　"Okay, then," I said. "That's settled. I'll just be on my way. Seth, I'll expect you back on at dusk, so geta nap in there somewhere, all right?""Sure, Jake. I'll phase back soon as I'm done. Unless ..." he hesitated, looking at Bella. "Do you needme?""She's got blankets," I snapped at him.　　"I'm fine, Seth, thanks," Bella said quickly.　　And then Esme flitted back in the room, a big covered dish in her hands. She stopped hesitantly justbehind Carlisle's elbow, her wide, dark gold eyes on my face. She held the dish out and took a shy stepcloser.　　"Jacob," she said quietly. Her voice wasn't quite so piercing as the others'. "I know it's... unappetizing toyou, the idea of eating here, where it smells so unpleasant. But I would feel much better if you would takesome food with you when you go. I know you can't go home, and that's because of us. Please—easesome of my remorse. Take something to eat." She held the food out to me, her face all soft and pleading.　　I don't know how she did it, because she didn't look older than her mid-twenties, and she was bone pale,too, but something about her expression suddenly reminded me of my mom.　　Jeez.　　"Uh, sure, sure," I mumbled. "I guess. Maybe Leah's still hungry or something."I reached out and took the food with one hand, holding it away, at arm's length. I'd go dump it under atree or something. I didn't want her to feel bad.　　Then I remembered Edward.　　Don't you say anything to her! Let her think I ate it.　　I didn't look at him to see if he was in agreement. He'd better be in agreement. Bloodsucker owed me.　　"Thank you, Jacob," Esme said, smiling at me. How did a stone face have dimples, for crying out loud?　　"Urn, thank you," I said. My face felt hot—hotter than usual.　　This was the problem with hanging out with vampires—you got used to them. They started messing upthe way you saw the world. They started feeling like friends.　　"Will you come back later, Jake?" Bella asked as I tried to make a run for it.　　"Uh, I don't know."She pressed her lips together, like she was trying not to smile. "Please? I might get cold."I inhaled deeply through my nose, and then realized, too late, that that was not a good idea. I winced.　　"Maybe.""Jacob?" Esme asked. I backed toward the door as she continued; she took a few steps after me. "I lefta basket of clothes on the porch. They're for Leah. They're freshly washed—I tried to touch them as littleas possible." She frowned. "Do you mind taking them to her?""On it," I muttered, and then I ducked out the door before anyone could guilt me into anything else.
    Chapter 15 Tick Tock Tick Tock
    Hey Jake, thought you said you wanted me at dusk. How come you didn't have Leah wake me upbefore she crashed?　　'Cause I didn't need you. I'm still good.　　He was already picking up the north half of the circle. Anything?　　Nope. Nothing but nothing.　　You did some scouting?　　He'dcaught the edge of one of my side trips. He headed up the new trail.　　Yeah—/ ran a few spokes. You know, just checking. If the Cullens are going to make a huntingtrip...　　Good call.　　Seth looped back toward the main perimeter.　　It was easier to run with him than it was to do the same with Leah. Though she was trying—tryinghard—there was always an edge to her thoughts. She didn't want to be here. She didn't want to feel thesoftening toward the vampires that was going on in my head. She didn't want to deal with Seth's cozyfriendship with them, a friendship that was only getting stronger.　　Funny, though, I'd've thought her biggest issue would just be me. We'd always gotten on each other'snerves when we were in Sam's pack. But there was no antagonism toward me now at all, just the CullensandBella. I wondered why. Maybe it was simply gratitude that I wasn't forcing her to leave. Maybe itwas because I understood her hostility better now. Whichever, running with Leah wasn't nearly as bad asI'd expected.　　Of course, she hadn't eased up that much. The food and clothes Esme had sent for her were all taking atrip downriver right now. Even after I'd eaten my share—not because it smelled nearly irresistible awayfrom the vampire burn, but to set a good example of self-sacrificing tolerance for Leah—she'd refused.　　The small elk she'd taken down around noon had not totally satisfied her appetite. Did make her moodworse, though. Leah hated eating raw.　　Maybe we should runa sweep east? Seth suggested. Go deep, see if they're out there waiting.　　I was thinking about that,I agreed. But let's do it when we're all awake. I don't want to let down ourguard. We should do it before the Cullens give it a try, though. Soon.　　Right.　　That got me thinking.　　If the Cullens were able to get out of the immediate area safely, they really ought to keep on going. Theyprobably should have taken off the second we'd come to warn them. They had to be able to afford otherdigs. And they had friends up north, right? Take Bella and run. It seemed like an obvious answer to theirproblems.　　I probably ought to suggest that, but I was afraid they would listen to me. And I didn't wantto haveBelladisappear—to never know whether she'd made it or not.　　No, that was stupid. I wouldtell them togo. It made no sense for them to stay, and it would be better—not less painful, but healthier—for me if Bella left.　　Easyto say now, when Bella wasn't right there, looking all thrilled to see me and also clinging to life byher fingernails at the same time...　　Oh, I already asked Edward about that,Seth thought.　　What?　　I asked him why they hadn't taken off yet. Gone up to Tanya's place or something. Somewhere too farfor Sam to come after them.　　I had to remind myself that I'd just decided to give the Cullens that exact advice. That it was best. So Ishouldn't be mad at Seth for taking the chore out of my hands. Not mad at all.　　So what did he say? Are they waiting for a window?　　No. They're not leaving.　　And that shouldn't sound like good news.　　Why not? That's just stupid.　　Not really,Seth said, defensive now. It takes some time to build up the kind of medical access thatCarlisle has here. He's got all the stuff he needs to take care of Bella, and the credentials to getmore. That's one of the reasons they want to make a hunting run. Carlisle thinks they're going toneed more blood for Bella soon. She's using up all the O negative they stored for her. He doesn'tlike depleting the stockpile. He's going to buy some more. Did you know you can buy blood? Ifyou're a doctor.　　I wasn't ready to be logical yet. Still seems stupid. They could bring most of it with them, right?　　And steal what they need wherever they go. Who cares about legal crap when you're the undead?　　Edward doesn't want to take any risks moving her.　　She's better than she was.　　Seriously,Seth agreed. In his head, he was comparing my memories of Bella hooked up to the tubes withthelast time he'd seen her as he'd left the house. She'd smiled at him and waved. But she can't movearound much, you know. That thing is kicking the hell out of her.　　I swallowed back the stomach acid in my throat. Yeah, I know.　　Broke another of her ribs,he told me somberly.　　My stride faltered, and I staggered a step before I regained my rhythm.　　Carlisle taped her up again. Just another crack, he said. Then Rosalie said something about how evennormal human babies have been known to crack ribs. Edward looked like he was gonna rip her head off.　　Too bad he didn'tSeth was in full report mode now—knowing it was all vitally interesting to me, though I'd never've askedto hear it. Bella's been running a fever off and on today. Just low grade — sweats and then chills.　　Carlisle's not sure what to make of it— shemightjust be sick. Her immune system can't be in peakform right now.　　Yeah, I'm sure it's just a coincidence.　　She's in a good mood, though. She was chatting with Charlie, laughing and all—Charlie!What?! What do you mean, she was talking to Charlie?!　　Now Seth's pace stuttered; my fury surprised him. Guess he calls every day to talk to her. Sometimesher mom calls, too. Bella sounds so much better now, so she was reassuring him that she was onthe mend-On the mend? What the hell are they thinking?! Get Charlie's hopes up just so that hecan be destroyed even worse when she dies? I thought they were getting him ready for that!　　Trying to prepare him! Why would she set him up like this?　　She might not die,Seth thought quietly.　　I took deep breath, trying to calm myself. Seth. Even if she pulls through this, she's not doing ithuman. She knows that, and so do the rest of them. If she doesn't die, she's going to have to do apretty convincing impersonation of a corpse, kid. Either that, or disappear. I thought they weretrying to make this easier on Charlie. Why... ?　　Think it's Bella's idea. No one said anything, but Edward's face kinda went right along with what you'rethinking now.　　On the same wavelength with the bloodsucker yet again.　　We ran in silence for a few minutes. I started off along a new line, probing south.　　Don't get too far.　　Why?　　Bella asked me to ask you to stop by.　　My teeth locked together.　　Alice wants you, too. She says she's tired of hanging out in the attic like the vampire bat in the belfry.　　Seth snorted a laugh. / was switching off with Edward before. Trying to keep Bella's temperaturestable. Cold to hot, as needed. I guess, if you don't want to do it, I could go back—No. I got it,I snapped.　　Okay.Seth didn't make any more comments. He concentrated very hard on the empty forest.　　I kept my southern course, searching for anything new. I turned around when I got close to the first signsof habitation. Not near the town yet, but I didn't want to get any wolf rumors going again. We'd beennice and invisible for a long while now.　　I passed right through the perimeter on my way back, heading for the house. As much as I knew it was astupid thing to do, I couldn't stop myself. I must be some kind of masochist.　　There's nothing wrong with you, Jake. This isn't the most normal situation.　　Shut up, please, Seth.　　Shutting.　　I didn't hesitate at the door this time; I just walked through like I owned the place. I figured that wouldpiss Rosalie off, but it was a wasted effort. Neither Rosalie or Bella were anywhere in sight. I lookedaround wildly, hoping I'd missed them somewhere, my heart squeezing against my ribs in a weird,uncomfortable way.　　"She's all right," Edward whispered. "Or, the same, I should say."Edward was on the couch with his face in his hands; he hadn't looked up to speak. Esme was next tohim, her arm wrapped tight around his shoulders.　　"Hello, Jacob," she said. "I'm so glad you came back.""Me, too," Alice said with a deep sigh. She came prancing down the stairs, making a face. Like 1 waslate for an appointment.　　"Uh, hey," I said. It felt weird to try to be polite.　　"Where's Bella?""Bathroom," Alice told me. "Mostly fluid diet, you know. Plus, the whole pregnancy thing does that toyou, I hear.""Ah."I stood there awkwardly, rocking back and forth on my heels.　　"Oh, wonderful," Rosalie grumbled. I whipped my head around and saw her coming from a hallhalf-hidden behind the stairway. She had Bella cradled gently in her arms, a harsh sneer on her face forme. "I knew I smelled something nasty."And, just like before, Bella's face lit up like a kid's on Christmas morning. Like I'd brought her thegreatest gift ever.　　It was so unfair.　　"Jacob," she breathed. "You came.""Hi, Bells."Esme and Edward both got up. I watched how carefully Rosalie laid Bella out on the couch. I watchedhow, despite that, Bella turned white and held her breath—like she was set on not making any noise nomatter how much it hurt.　　Edward brushed his hand across her forehead and then along her neck. He tried to make it look as if hewasjust sweeping her hair back, but it looked like a doctor's examination to me.　　"Are you cold?" he murmured.　　I'm fine.""Bella, you know what Carlisle told you," Rosalie said. "Don't downplay anything. It doesn't help ustake care of either of you.""Okay, I'm a little cold. Edward, can you hand me that blanket?"I rolled my eyes. "Isn't that sort of the point of me being here?""You just walked in," Bella said. "After running all day, I'd bet. Put your feet up for a minute. I'llprobably warm up again in no time."I ignored her, going to sit on the floor next the sofa while she was still telling me what to do. At thatpoint, though, I wasn't sure how.... She looked pretty brittle, and I was afraid to move her, even to putmy arms around her. So I just leaned carefully against her side, letting my arm rest along the length ofhers, and held her hand. Then I put my other hand against her face. It was hard to tell if she felt colderthan usual.　　"Thanks, Jake," she said, and I felt her shiver once.　　"Yeah," I said.　　Edward sat on the arm of the sofa by Bella's feet, his eyes always on her face.　　It was too much to hope, with all the super-hearing in the room, that no one would notice my stomachrumbling.　　"Rosalie, why don't you get Jacob something from the kitchen?" Alice said. She was invisible now, sittingquietly behind the back of the sofa.　　Rosalie stared at the place Alice's voice had come from in disbelief.　　"Thanks, anyway, Alice, but I don't think I'd want to eat something Blondie's spit in. I'd bet my systemwouldn't take too kindly to venom.""Rosalie would never embarrass Esme by displaying such a lack of hospitality.""Of course not," Blondie said in a sugar-sweet voice that I immediately distrusted. She got up andbreezed out of the room.　　Edward sighed.　　"You'd tell me if she poisoned it, right?" I asked.　　"Yes," Edward promised.　　And for some reason I believed him.　　There was a lot of banging in the kitchen, and—weirdly—the sound of metal protesting as it wasabused. Edward sighed again, but smiled just a little, too. Then Rosalie was back before I could thinkmuch more about it. With a pleased smirk, she set a silver bowl on the floor next to me.　　"Enjoy, mongrel."It had once probably been a big mixing bowl, but she'd bent the bowl back in on itself until it wasshaped almost exactly like a dog dish. I had to be impressed with her quick craftsmanship. And herattention to detail. She'dscratched the word Fido into the side. Excellent handwriting.　　Because the food looked pretty good—steak, no less, and a big baked potato with all the fixings—I toldher, "Thanks, Blondie."She snorted.　　"Hey, do you know what you call a blonde with a brain?" I asked, and then continued on the samebreath, "a golden retriever.""I've heard that one, too," she said, no longer smiling.　　"I'll keep trying," I promised, and then I dug in.　　She made a disgusted face and rolled her eyes. Then she sat in one of the armchairs and started flickingthrough channels on the big TV so fast that there was no way she could really be surfing for something towatch.　　The food was good, even with the vampire stink in the air. I was getting really used to that. Huh. Notsomething I'd been wanting to do, exactly...　　When I was finished—though I was considering licking the bowl, just to give Rosalie something tocomplain about—I felt Bella's cold fingers pulling softly through my hair. She patted it down against theback of my neck.　　"Time for a haircut, huh?""You're getting a little shaggy," she said. "Maybe—""Let me guess, someone around here used to cut hair in a salon in Paris?"She chuckled. "Probably.""No thanks," I said before she could really offer. "I'm good for a few more weeks."Which made me wonder how long she was good for. I tried to think of a polite way to ask.　　"So... urn... what's the, er, date? You know, the due date for the little monster."She smacked the back of my head with about as much force as a drifting feather, but didn't answer.　　"I'm serious," I told her. "I want to know how long I'm gonna have to be here." How long you're gonnabe here, I added in my head. I turned to look at her then. Her eyes were thoughtful; the stress line wasthere between her brows again.　　"I don't know," she murmured. "Not exactly. Obviously, we're not going with the nine-month modelhere, and we can't get an ultrasound, so Carlisle is guesstimating from how big I am. Normal people aresupposed to be about forty centimeters here"—she ran her finger right down the middle of her bulgingstomach—"when the baby is fully grown. One centimeter for every week. I was thirty this morning, andI've been gaining about two centimeters a day, sometimes more___"Two weeks to a day, the days flying by. Her life speeding by in fast-forward. How many days did thatgive her, if she was counting to forty? Four? It took me a minute to figure out how to swallow.　　"You okay?" she asked.　　I nodded, not really sure how my voice would come out.　　Edward's face was turned away from us as he listened to my thoughts, but I could see his reflection inthe glasswall. He was the burning man again.　　Funny how having a deadline made it harder to think about leaving, or having her leave. I was gladSeth'd brought that up, so I knew they were staying here. It would be intolerable, wondering if they wereabout to go, to take away one or two or three of those four days. My four days.　　Also funny how, even knowing that it was almost over, the hold she had on me only got harder to break.　　Almost like it was related to her expanding belly—as if by getting bigger, she was gaining gravitationalforce.　　For a minute I tried to look at her from a distance, to separate myself from the pull. I knew it wasn't myimagination that my need for her was stronger than ever. Why was that? Because she was dying? Orknowing that even if she didn't, still—best case scenario—she'd be changing into something else that Iwouldn't know or understand?　　She ran her finger across my cheekbone, and my skin was wet where she touched it.　　"It's going to be okay," she sort of crooned. It didn't matter that the words meant nothing. She said it theway people sang those senseless nursery rhymes to kids. Rock-a-bye, baby.　　"Right," I muttered.　　She curled against my arm, resting her head on my shoulder. "I didn't think you would come. Seth saidyou would, and so did Edward, but I didn't believe them.""Why not?" I asked gruffly.　　"You're not happy here. But you came anyway.""You wanted me here.""I know. But you didn't have to come, because it's not fair for me to want you here. I would haveunderstood."It was quiet for a minute. Edward'd put his face back together. He looked at the TV as Rosalie went onflipping through the channels. She was into the six hundreds. I wondered how long it would take to getback to the beginning.　　"Thank you for coming," Bella whispered.　　"Can I ask you something?" I asked.　　"Of course."Edward didn't look like he was paying attention to us at all, but he knew what I was about to ask, so hedidn't fool me.　　"Why do you want me here? Seth could keep you warm, and he's probably easier to be around, happylittle punk. But when / walk in the door, you smile like I'm your favorite person in the world.""You're one of them.""That sucks, you know.""Yeah." She sighed. "Sorry.""Why, though? You didn't answer that."Edward was looking away again, like he was staring out the windows. His face was blank in thereflection.　　"It feels... complete when you're here, Jacob. Like all my family is together. I mean, I guess that's whatit'slike—I've never had a big family before now. It's nice." She smiled for half a second. "But it's just notwhole unless you're here.""I'll never be part of your family, Bella."I could have been. I would have been good there. But that was just a distant future that died long beforeit had a chance to live.　　"You've always been a part of my family," she disagreed.　　My teeth made a grinding sound. 'That's a crap answer.""What's a good one?""How about, 'Jacob, I get a kick out of your pain.'"I felt her flinch.　　"You'd like that better?" she whispered.　　"It's easier, at least. I could wrap my head around it. I could deal with it."I looked back down at her face then, so close to mine. Her eyes were shut and she was frowning. "Wegot off track, Jake. Out of balance. You're supposed to be part of my life—I can feel that, and so canyou." She paused for a second without opening her eyes—like she was waiting for me to deny it. When Ididn't say anything, she went on. "But not like this. We did something wrong. No. I did. I did somethingwrong, and we got off track___"Her voice trailed off, and the frown on her face relaxed until it was just a little pucker at the corner of herlips. I waited for her to pour some more lemon juice into my paper cuts, but then a soft snore came fromthe back of her throat.　　"She's exhausted," Edward murmured. "It's been a long day. A hard day. I think she would have gone tosleep earlier, but she was waiting for you."I didn't look at him.　　"Seth said it broke another of her ribs.""Yes. It's making it hard for her to breathe.""Great.""Let me know when she gets hot again.""Yeah."She still had goose bumps on the arm that wasn't touching mine. I'd barely raised my head to look for ablanket when Edward snagged one draped over the arm of the sofa and flung it out so that it settled overher.　　Occasionally, the mind-reading thing saved time. For example, maybe I wouldn't have to make a bigproduction out of the accusation about what was going on with Charlie. That mess. Edward would justhear exactly how furious—"Yes," he agreed. "It's not a good idea.""Then why?" Why was Bella telling her father she was on the mend when it would only make him moremiserable?　　"She can't bear his anxiety.""So it's better—""No. It's not better. But I'm not going to force her to do anything that makes her unhappy now.　　Whatever happens, this makes her feel better. I'll deal with the rest afterward."That didn't sound right. Bella wouldn't just shuffle Charlie's pain off to some later date, for someone elseto face. Even dying. That wasn't her. If I knew Bella, she had to have some other plan.　　"She's very sure she's going to live," Edward said.　　"But not human," I protested.　　"No, not human. But she hopes to see Charlie again, anyway."Oh, this just got better and better.　　"See. Charlie." I finally looked at him, my eyes bugging. "Afterwards. See Charlie when she's all sparklywhite with the bright red eyes. I'm not a bloodsucker, so maybe I'm missing something, but Charlieseems like kind of a strange choice for her first meal."Edward sighed. "She knows she won't be able to be near him for at least a year. She thinks she can stall.　　Tell Charlie she has to go to a special hospital on the other side of the world. Keep in contact throughphone calls___""That's insane.""Yes.""Charlie's not stupid. Even if she doesn't kill him, he's going to notice a difference.""She's sort of banking on that."I continued to stare, waiting for him to explain.　　"She wouldn't be aging, of course, so that would set a time limit, even if Charlie accepted whateverexcuse she comes up with for the changes." He smiled faintly. "Do you remember when you tried to tellher about your transformation? How you made her guess?"My free hand flexed into a fist. "She told you about that?""Yes. She was explaining her... idea. You see, she's not allowed totell Charlie the truth—it would bevery dangerous for him. But he's a smart, practical man. She thinks he'll come up with his ownexplanation. She assumes he'll get it wrong." Edward snorted. "After all, we hardly adhere to vampirecanon. He'll make some wrong assumption about us, like she did in the beginning, and we'll go along withit. She thinks she'll be able to see him... from time to time.""Insane," I repeated.　　"Yes," he agreed again.　　It was weak of him to let her get her way on this, just to keep her happy now. It wouldn't turn out well.　　Which made me think that he probably wasn't expecting her to live to try out her crazy plan. Placatingher, so that she could be happy for a little while longer.　　Like four more days.　　"I'll deal with whatever comes," he whispered, and he turned his face down and away so that I couldn'teven read his reflection. "I won't cause her pain now.""Four days?"I asked.　　He didn't look up. "Approximately.""Then what?""What do you mean, exactly?"I thought about what Bella had said. About the thing being wrapped up nice and tight in somethingstrong, something like vampire skin. So how did that work? How did it get out?　　"From what little research we've been able to do, it would appear the creatures use their own teeth toescape the womb," he whispered.　　I had to pause to swallow back the bile.　　"Research?" I asked weakly.　　"That's why you haven't seen Jasper and Emmett around. That's what Carlisle is doing now. Trying todecipher ancient stories and myths, as much as we can with what we have to work with here, looking foranything that might help us predict the creature's behavior."Stories? If there were myths, then...　　"Then is this thing not the first of its kind?" Edward asked, anticipating my question. "Maybe. It's all verysketchy. The myths could easily be the products of fear and imagination. Though .. ."—hehesitated—"your myths are true, are they not? Perhaps these are, too. They do seem to be localized,linked___""How did you find... ?""There was a woman we encountered in South America. She'd been raised in the traditions of herpeople. She'd heard warnings about such creatures, old stories that had been passed down.""What were the warnings?" I whispered.　　"That the creature must be killed immediately. Before it could gain too much strength."Just like Sam thought. Was he right?　　"Of course, their legends say the same of us. That we must be destroyed. That we are soullessmurderers."Two for two.　　Edward laughed one hard chuckle.　　"What did their stories say about the... mothers?"Agony ripped across his face, and, as I flinched away from his pain, I knew he wasn't going to give mean answer. I doubted he could talk.　　tt was Rosalie—who'd been so still and quiet since Bella'd fallen asleep that I'd nearly forgottenher—who answered.　　She made a scornful noise in the back of her throat. "Of course there were no survivors," she said. Nosurvivors, blunt and uncaring. "Giving birth in the middle of a disease-infested swamp with a medicineman smearingsloth spit across your face to drive out the evil spirits was never the safest method. Even the normalbirths went badly half the time. None of them had what this baby has—caregivers with an idea of whatthe baby needs, who try to meet those needs. A doctor with a totally unique knowledge of vampirenature. A plan in place to deliver the baby as safely as possible. Venom that will repair anything that goeswrong. The baby will be fine. And those other mothers would probably have survived if they'd hadthat—if they even existed in the first place. Something I am not convinced of." She sniffed disdainfully.　　The baby, the baby. Like that was all that mattered. Bella's life was a minor detail to her—easy to blowoff.　　Edward's face went white as snow. His hands curved into claws. Totally egotistical and indifferent,Rosalie twisted in her chair so that her back was to him. He leaned forward, shifting into a crouch.　　Allow me,I suggested.　　He paused, raising one eyebrow.　　Silently, I lifted my doggy bowl off the floor. Then, with a quick, powerful flip of my wrist, I threw it intothe back of Blondie's head so hard that—with an earsplitting bang —it smashed flat before it ricochetedacross the room and snapped the round top piece off the thick newel post at the foot of the stairs.　　Bella twitched but didn't wake up.　　"Dumb blonde," I muttered.　　Rosalie turned her head slowly, and her eyes were blazing.　　"You. Got. Food. In. My. Hair."That did it.　　I busted up.I pulled away fromBella so that I wouldn't shake her, and laughed so hard that tears randown my face. From behind the couch, I heard Alice's tinkling laugh join in.　　I wondered why Rosalie didn't spring. I sort of expected it. But then I realized that my laughing hadwoken Bella up, though she'd slept right through the real noise.　　"What's so funny?" she mumbled.　　"I got food in her hair," I told her, chortling again.　　"I'm not going to forget this, dog," Rosalie hissed.　　"S'not so hard to erase a blonde's memory," I countered. "Just blow in her ear.""Get some new jokes," she snapped.　　"C'mon, Jake. Leave Rose alo—" Bella broke off mid-sentence and sucked in a sharp breath. In thesame second, Edward was leaning over the top of me, ripping the blanket out of the way. She seemed toconvulse, her back arching off the sofa.　　"He's just," she panted, "stretching."Her lips were white, and she had her teeth locked together like she was trying to hold back a scream.　　Edward put both hands on either side of her face.　　"Carlisle?" he called in a tense, low voice.　　"Right here," the doctor said. I hadn't heard him come in.　　"Okay," Bella said, still breathing hard and shallow. "Think it's over. Poor kid doesn't have enough room,that's all. He's getting so big."It was really hard to take, that adoring tone she used to describe the thing that was tearing her up.　　Especially after Rosalie's callousness. Made me wish I could throw something at Bella, too.　　She didn't pick up on my mood. "You know, he reminds me of you, Jake," she said—affectionatetone—still gasping.　　"Do not compare me to that thing," I spit out through my teeth.　　"I just meant your growth spurt," she said, looking like I'd hurt her feelings. Good. "You shot right up. Icould watch you getting taller by the minute. He's like that, too. Growing so fast."I bit my tongue to keep from saying what I wanted to say—hard enough that I tasted blood in mymouth. Of course, it would heal before I could swallow. That's what Bella needed. To be strong like me,to be able to heal....　　She took an easier breath and then relaxed back into the sofa, her body going limp.　　"Hmm," Carlisle murmured. I looked up, and his eyes were on me.　　"What?" I demanded.　　Edward's head leaned to one side as he reflected on whatever was in Carlisle's head.　　"You know that I was wondering about the fetus's genetic makeup, Jacob. About his chromosomes.""What of it?""Well, taking your similarities into consideration—""Similarif/es?" I growled, not appreciating the plural.　　"The accelerated growth, and the fact that Alice cannot see either of you."I felt my face go blank. I'd forgotten about that other one.　　"Well, I wonder if that means that we have an answer. If the similarities are gene-deep.""Twenty-four pairs," Edward muttered under his breath.　　"You don't know that.""No. But it's interesting to speculate," Carlisle said in a soothing voice.　　"Yeah. Just fascinating"Bella's light snore started up again, accenting my sarcasm nicely.　　They got into it then, quickly taking the genetics conversation to a point where the only words I couldunderstand were the the's and the ands. And my own name, of course. Alice joined in, commenting nowand then in her chirpy bird voice.　　Even though they were talking about me, I didn't try to figure out the conclusions they were drawing. Ihad other things on my mind, a few facts I was trying to reconcile.　　Fact one, Bella'd said that the creature was protected by something as strong as vampire skin, somethingthat was too impenetrable for ultrasounds, too tough for needles. Fact two, Rosalie'd said they had a planto deliver thecreature safely. Fact three, Edward'd said that—in myths—other monsters like this one would chewtheir way out of their own mothers.　　I shuddered.　　And that made a sick kind of sense, because, fact four, not many things could cut through something asstrong as vampire skin. The half-creature's teeth—according to myth—were strong enough. My teethwere strong enough.　　And vampire teeth were strong enough.　　It was hard to miss the obvious, but I sure wished I could. Because I had a pretty good idea exactlyhow Rosalie planned to get that thing "safely" out.
    Chapter 16 Too Much Information Alert
    I took off early, long before sunrise was due. I'd gotten just a little bit of uneasy sleep leaning against theside of the sofa. Edward woke me when Bella's face was flushed, and he took my spot to cool her backdown. I stretched and decided I was rested enough to get some work done.　　"Thank you," Edward said quietly, seeing my plans. "If the route is clear, they'll go today."Tillet you know."It felt good to get back to my animal self. I was stiff from sitting still for so long. I extended my stride,working out the kinks.　　Morning, Jacob,Leah greeted me.　　Good, you're up. How long's Seth been out?　　Not out yet,Seth thought sleepily. Almost there. What do you need?　　You think you got another hour in you?　　Sure thing. No problem.Seth got to his feet right away, shaking out his fur.　　Let's make the deep run,Itold Leah. Seth, take the perimeter.　　Gotcha.Seth broke into an easy jog.　　Off on another vampire errand,Leah grumbled.　　You got a problem with that?　　Of course not. I just love to coddle those darling leeches.　　Good. Let's see how fast we can run.　　Okay, I'm definitely up forthat/Leah was on the far western rim of the perimeter. Rather than cut close to the Cullens' house, she stuckto the circle as she raced around to meet me. I sprinted off straight east, knowing that even with the headstart, she'd bepassing me soon if I took it easy for even a second.　　Nose to the ground, Leah. This isn't a race, it's a reconnaissance mission.　　I can do both and still kick your buttI gave her that one. / know.　　She laughed.　　We took a winding path through the eastern mountains. It wasa familiar route. We'd run these mountainswhen the vampires had left a year ago, making it part of our patrol route to better protect the peoplehere. Then we'd pulled back the lines when the Cullens returned. This was their treaty land.　　But that fact would probably mean nothing to Sam now. The treaty was dead. The question today washow thin he was willing to spread his force. Was he looking for stray Cullens to poach on their land ornot? Had Jared spoken the truth or taken advantage of the silence between us?　　We got deeper and deeper into the mountains without finding any trace of the pack. Fading vampiretrails were everywhere, but the scents were familiar now. I was breathing them in all day long.　　I founda heavy, somewhat recent concentration on one particular trail—all of them coming and goinghere except for Edward. Some reason for gathering that must have been forgotten when Edward broughthis dying pregnant wife home. I gritted my teeth. Whatever it was, it had nothing to do with me.　　Leah didn't push herself past me, though she could have now. I was paying more attention to each newscent than I was to the speed contest. She kept to my right side, running with me rather than racingagainst me.　　Were getting pretty far out here,she commented.　　Yeah. If Sam was hunting strays, we should have crossed his trail by now.　　Makes more sense right now for him to bunker down in La Push,Leah thought. He knows we're givingthe bloodsuckers three extra sets of eyes and legs. He's not going to be able to surprise them.　　This was just a precaution, really.　　Wouldn't want our precious parasites taking unnecessary chances.　　Nope,I agreed, ignoring the sarcasm.　　You've changed so much, Jacob. Talk about one-eighties.　　You're not exactly the same Leah I've always known and loved, either.　　True. Am I less annoying than Paul now?　　Amazingly... yes.　　Ah, sweet success.　　Congrats.　　We ran in silence again then. It was probably time to turn around, but neither of us wanted to. It felt niceto run like this. We'd been staring at the same small circle of atrail for too long. It felt good to stretch ourmuscles and take the rugged terrain. We weren't in a huge hurry, so I thought maybe we should hunt onthe way back. Leah was prettyhungry.　　Yum, yum,she thought sourly.　　It's all in your head,I told her. That's the way wolves eat. It's natural. It tastes fine. If you didn'tthink about it from a human perspective—Forget the pep talk, Jacob. I'll hunt I don't have to like itSure, sure,I agreed easily. It wasn't my business if she wanted to make things harder for herself.　　She didn't add anything for a few minutes; I started thinking about turning back.　　Thank you,Leah suddenly told me in a much different tone.　　For?　　For letting me be. For letting me stay. You've been nicer than I had any right to expect, Jacob.　　Er, no problem. Actually, I mean that. I don't mind having you here like I thought I would.　　She snorted, but it was a playful sound. What a glowing commendation!　　Don't let it go to your head.　　Okay— if you don't let this go to yours.She paused for a second. / think you make a good Alpha.　　Not in the same way Sam does, but in your own way. You're worth following, Jacob.　　My mind went blank with surprise. It took me a second to recover enough to respond.　　Er, thanks. Not totally sure I'll be able to stop that one from going to my head, though. Where did thatcome from?　　She didn't answer right away, and I followed the wordless direction of her thoughts. She was thinkingabout the future—about what I'd said to Jared the other morning. About how the time would be up soon,and then I'd go back to the forest. About how I'd promised that she and Seth would return to the packwhen the Cullens were gone___/ want to stay with you, she told me.　　The shock shot through my legs, locking my joints. She blew past me and then put on the brakes.　　Slowly, she walked back to where I was frozen in place.　　/ won't be a pain, I swear. I won't follow you around. You can go wherever you want, and I'll gowhere I want. You'll only have to put up with me when we're both wolves. She paced back and forthin front of me, swishing her long gray tail nervously. And, as I'm planning on quitting as soon as I canmanage it... maybe that won't be so often.　　I didn't know what to say.　　I'm happier now, as a part of your pack, than I have been in years.　　I want to stay, too,Seth thought quietly. I hadn't realized he'd been paying much attention to us as he ranthe perimeter. / like this pack.　　Hey, now! Seth, this isn't going to be a pack much longer.I tried to put my thoughts together so theywould convince him. We've got a purpose now, but when... after that's over, I'm just going to gowolf. Seth, you need a purpose. You're a good kid. You're the kind of person who always has acrusade. And there's no way you're leaving La Push now. You're going to graduate from highschool and do something with your life. You're going to take care of Sue.　　My issues are not going to mess up your future.　　But —Jacob is rightLeah seconded.　　You're agreeing with me?　　Of course. But none of that applies tome. / was on my way out anyway. I'll get a job somewhereaway from La Push. Maybe take some courses at a community college. Get into yoga andmeditation to work on my temper issues.... And stay a part of this pack for the sake of my mentalwell-being. Jacob— you can see how that makes sense, right? I won't bother you, you won'tbother me, everyone is happy.　　I turned back and started loping slowly toward the west.　　This is a bit much to deal with, Leah. Let me think about it, 'kay?　　Sure. Take your time.　　It took us longer to make the run back. I wasn't trying for speed. I was just trying to concentrate enoughthat I wouldn't plow headfirst into a tree. Seth was grumbling a little bit in the back of my head, but I wasable to ignore him. He knew I was right. He wasn't going to abandon his mom. He would go back to LaPush and protect the tribe like he should.　　But I couldn't see Leah doing that. And that was just plain scary.　　A pack of the two of us? No matter the physical distance, I couldn't imagine the... the intimacy of thatsituation. I wondered if she'd really thought it through, or if she was just desperate to stay free.　　Leah didn't say anything as I chewed it over. It was like she was trying to prove how easy it would be ifit was just us.　　We ran into a herd of black-tailed deer just as the sun was coming up, brightening the clouds a little bitbehind us. Leah sighed internally but didn't hesitate. Her lunge was clean and efficient—graceful, even.　　She took down the largest one, the buck, before the startled animal fully understood the danger.　　Not to be outdone, I swooped down on the next largest deer, snapping her neck between my jawsquickly, so she wouldn't feel unnecessary pain. I could feel Leah's disgust warring with her hunger, and Itried to make it easier for her by letting the wolf in me have my head. I'd lived all-wolf for long enoughthat I knew how to be the animal completely, to see his way and think his way. I let the practical instinctstake over, letting her feel that, too. She hesitated for a second, but then, tentatively, she seemed to reachout with her mind and try to see my way. It felt very strange—our minds were more closely linked thanthey had ever been before, because we both were trying to think together.　　Strange, but it helped her. Her teeth cut through the fur and skin of her kill's shoulder, tearing away athick slab of streaming flesh. Rather than wince away as her human thoughts wanted to, she let herwolf-self react instinctively. It was kind of a numbing thing, a thoughtless thing. It let her eat in peace.　　It was easy for me to do the same. And I was glad I hadn't forgotten this. This would be my life againsoon.　　Was Leah going to be a part of that life? A week ago, I wouldve found that idea beyond horrifying. Iwouldn't'vebeen able to stand it. But I knew her better now. And, relieved from the constant pain, she wasn't thesame wolf. Not the same girl.　　We ate together until we both were full.　　Thanks,she told me later as she was cleaning her muzzle and paws against the wet grass. I didn't bother;it had just started to drizzle and we had to swim the river again on our way back. I'd get clean enough.　　That wasn't so bad, thinking your way.　　You're welcome.　　Seth was dragging when we hit the perimeter. I told him to get some sleep; Leah and I would take overthe patrol. Seth's mind faded into unconsciousness just seconds later.　　You headed back to the bloodsuckers?Leah asked.　　Maybe.　　It's hard for you to be there, but hard to stay away, too. I know how that feels.　　You know, Leah, you might want to think a little bit about the future, about what you really want to do.　　My head is not going to be the happiest place on earth. And you'll have to suffer right along with me.　　She thought about how to answer me. Wow, this is going to sound bad. But, honestly, it will beeasier to deal with your pain than face mine.　　Fair enough.　　I know it's going to be bad for you, Jacob. I understand that— maybe better than you think. I don'tlike her, but... she's your Sam. She's everything you want and everything you can't have.　　I couldn't answer.　　/ know it's worse for you. At least Sam is happy. At least he's alive and well. I love him enoughthat I want that. I want him to have what's best for him. She sighed. I just don't want to stickaround to watch.　　Do we need to talk about this?　　I think we do. Because I want you to know that I won't make it worse for you. Hell, maybe I'll evenhelp. I wasn'tborn a compassionless shrew. I used to be sort of nice, you know.　　My memory doesn't go that far back.　　We both laughed once.　　I'm sorry about this, Jacob. I'm sorry you're in pain. I'm sorry it's getting worse and not betterThanks, Leah.　　She thought about the things that were worse, the black pictures in my head, while I tried to tune her outwithout much success. She was able to look at them with some distance, some perspective, and I had toadmit that this was helpful. I could imagine that maybe I would be able to see it that way, too, in a fewyears.　　She saw the funny side of the daily irritations that came from hanging out around vampires. She liked myragging on Rosalie, chuckling internally and even running through a few blonde jokes in her mind that Imight be ableto work in. But then her thoughts turned serious, lingering on Rosalie's face in a way that confused me.　　You know what's crazy?she asked.　　Well, almost everything is crazy right now. But what do you mean?　　That blond vampire you hate so much—/ totally get her perspective.　　For a second I thought she was making a joke that was in very poor taste. And then, when I realized shewas serious, the fury that ripped through me was hard to control. It was a good thing we'd spread out torun our watch. If she'd been within biting distance...　　Hold up! Let me explain!　　Don't want to hear it I'm outta here.　　Wait! Wait!she pleaded as I tried to calm myself enough to phase back. C'mon, Jake!　　Leah, this isn't really the best way to convince me that I want to spend more time with you in the future.　　Yeesh! What an overreaction. You don't even know what I'm talking aboutSo whatare you talking about?　　And then she was suddenly the pain-hardened Leah from before. I'm talking about being a geneticdead end, Jacob.　　The vicious edge to her words left me floundering. I hadn't expected to have my anger trumped.　　I don't understand.　　Youwould, if you weren't just like the rest of them. If my "female sfu/T—she thought the words witha hard, sarcastic tone— didn't send you running for cover just like any stupid male, so you couldactually pay attention to what it all means.　　Oh.　　Yeah, so none of us like to think about that stuff with her. Who would? Of course I remembered Leah'spanic that first month after she joined the pack—and I remembered cringing away from it just likeeveryone else. Because she couldn't be pregnant— not unless there was some really freaky religiousimmaculate crap going on. She hadn't been with anyone since Sam. And then, when the weeks draggedon and nothing turned into more nothing, she'd realized that her body wasn't following the normal patternsanymore. The horror—what was she now? Had her body changed because she'd become a werewolf?　　Or had she become a werewolf because her body was wrong? The only female werewolf in the historyof forever. Was that because she wasn't as female as she should be?　　None of us had wanted to deal with that breakdown. Obviously, it wasn't like we could empathize.　　You know why Sam thinks we imprint,she thought, calmer now.　　Sure. To carry on the line.　　Right. To make a bunch of new little werewolves. Survival of the species, genetic override. You'redrawn to the person who gives you the best chance to pass on the wolf gene.　　I waited for her to tell me where she was qoinq with this.　　If I was any good for that, Sam would have been drawn tome.　　Her pain was enough that I broke stride under it.　　But I'm not There's something wrong with me. I don't have the ability to pass on the gene, apparently,despite my stellar bloodlines. So I become a freak— the girlie-wolf—good for nothing else. I'm agenetic dead end and we both know it.　　We do not,I argued with her. That's just Sam's theory. Imprinting happens, but we don't know why.　　Billy thinks it's something else.　　I know, I know. He thinks you're imprinting to makestronger wolves. Because you and Sam are suchhumongous monsters— bigger than our fathers. But either way, I'm still not a candidate. I'm... I'mmenopausal. I'm twenty years old and I'm menopausal.　　Ugh. I so didn't want to have this conversation. You don't know that, Leah. It's probably just thewhole frozen-in-time thing. When you quit your wolf and start getting older again, I'm sure thingswill... er... pick right back up.　　/might think that— except that no one's imprinting onme, notwithstanding my impressivepedigree. You know, she added thoughtfully, if you weren't around, Seth would probably have thebest claim to being Alpha — through his blood, at least. Of course, no one would ever considerme....　　You reallywant to imprint, or be imprinted on, or whichever? I demanded. What's wrong withgoing out and falling in love like a normal person, Leah? Imprinting is just another way of gettingyour choices taken away from you.　　Sam, Jared, Paul, Quit... they don't seem to mind.　　None of themhave a mind of their own.　　You don't want to imprint?　　Hell, no!　　That's just because you're already in love withher. That would go away, you know, if you imprinted.　　You wouldn't have to hurt over her anymore.　　Do you want to forget the way you feel about Sam?　　She deliberated for a moment. / think I do.　　I sighed. She was in a healthier place than I was.　　But back to my original point, Jacob. I understand why your blond vampire is so cold— in thefigurative sense. She's focused. She's got her eyes on the prize, right? Because you always wantthe very most what you can never, ever have.　　You would act like Rosalie? You would murder someone— because that's what she's doing,making sure no one interferes with Bella's death— you would do that to have a baby? Since whenare you a breeder?　　I just want the options I don't have, Jacob. Maybe, if there was nothing wrong with me, I would nevergive it a thought.　　You would kill for that?I demanded, not letting her escape my question.　　That's not what she's doing. I think it's more like she's living vicariously. And... if Bella askedme to helpher withthis...She paused, considering. Even though I don't think too much of her, I'd probably do the sameas the bloodsucker.　　A loud snarl ripped through my teeth.　　Because, if it was turned around, I'd want Bella to do that for me. And so would Rosalie. We'd both doit her way.　　Ugh! You're as bad as they are!　　That's the funny thing about knowing you can't have something. It makes you desperate.　　And.. . that's my limit Right there. This conversation is over.　　Fine.　　It wasn't enough that she'd agreed to stop. I wanted a stronger termination than that.　　I was only about a mile from where I'd left my clothes, so I phased back to human and walked. I didn'tthink about our conversation. Not because there wasn't anything to think about, but because I couldn'tstand it. I would not see it that way—but it was harder to keep from doing that when Leah had put thethoughts and emotions straight into my head.　　Yeah, I wasn't running with her when this was finished. She could go be miserable in La Push. One littleAlpha command before I left for good wasn't going to kill anybody.　　It was real early when I got to the house. Bella was probably still asleep. I figured I'd poke my head in,see what was going on, give 'em the green light to go hunting, and then find a patch of grass soft enoughto sleep on while human. I wasn't phasing back until Leah was asleep.　　But there was a lot of low mumbling going on inside the house, so maybe Bella wasn't sleeping. And thenI heard the machinery sound from upstairs again—the X-ray? Great. It looked like day four on thecountdown was starting off with a bang.　　Alice opened the door for me before I could walk in.　　She nodded. "Hey, wolf.""Hey, shortie. What's going on upstairs?" The big room was empty—all the murmurs were on thesecond floor.　　She shrugged her pointy little shoulders. "Maybe another break." She tried to say the words casually, butI could see the flames in the very back of her eyes. Edward and I weren't the only ones who wereburning over this. Alice loved Bella, too.　　"Another rib?" I asked hoarsely.　　"No. Pelvis this time."Funny how it kept hitting me, like each new thing was a surprise. When was I going to stop beingsurprised? Each new disaster seemed kinda obvious in hindsight.　　Alice was staring at my hands, watching them tremble.　　Then we were listening to Rosalie's voice upstairs.　　"See, I told you I didn't hear a crack. You need your ears checked, Edward."There was no answer.　　Alice made a face. "Edward's going to end up ripping Rose into small pieces, I think. I'm surprised shedoesn't see that. Or maybe she thinks Emmett will be able to stop him.""I'll take Emmett," I offered. "You can help Edward with the ripping part."Alice half-smiled.　　The procession came down the stairs then—Edward had Bella this time. She was gripping her cup ofblood in both hands, and her face was white. I could see that, though he compensated for every tinymovement of his body to keep from jostling her, she was hurting.　　"Jake," she whispered, and she smiled through the pain.　　I stared at her, saying nothing.　　Edward placed Bella carefully on her couch and sat on the floor by her head. I wondered briefly whythey didn't leave her upstairs, and then decided at once that it must be Bella's idea. She'd want to act likethings were normal, avoid the hospital setup. And he was humoring her. Naturally.　　Carlisle came down slowly, the last one, his face creased with worry. It made him look old enough to bea doctor for once.　　"Carlisle," I said. "We went halfway to Seattle. There's no sign of the pack. You're good to go.""Thank you, Jacob. This is good timing. There's much that we need." His black eyes flickered to the cupthat Bella was holding so tight.　　"Honestly, I think you're safe to take more than three. I'm pretty positive that Sam is concentrating on LaPush."Carlisle nodded in agreement. It surprised me how willingly he took my advice. "If you think so. Alice,Esme, Jasper, and I will go. Then Alice can take Emmett and Rosa—""Not a chance," Rosalie hissed. "Emmett can go with you now.""You should hunt," Carlisle said in a gentle voice.　　His tone didn't soften hers. "I'll hunt when he does," she growled, jerking her head toward Edward andthen flipping her hair back.　　Carlisle sighed.　　Jasper and Emmett were down the stairs in a flash, and Alice joined them by the glass back door in thesame second. Esme flitted to Alice's side.　　Carlisle put his hand on my arm. The icy touch did not feel good, but I didn't jerk away. I held still, halfin surprise, and half because I didn't want to hurt his feelings.　　"Thank you," he said again, and then he darted out the door with the other four. My eyes followed themas they flew across the lawn and then disappeared before I took another breath. Their needs must havebeen more urgent than I'd imagined.　　There was no sound for a minute. I could feel someone glaring at me, and I knew who it would be. I'dbeen planning to take off and get some Z's, but the chance to ruin Rosalie's morning seemed too good topass up.　　So I sauntered over to the armchair next to the one Rosalie had and settled in, sprawling out so that myheadwas tilted toward Bella and my left foot was near Rosalie's face.　　"Ew. Someone put the dog out," she murmured, wrinkling her nose.　　"Have you heard this one, Psycho? How do a blonde's brain cells die?"She didn't say anything.　　"Well?" I asked. "Do you know the punch line or not?"She looked pointedly at the TV and ignored me.　　"Has she heard it?" I asked Edward.　　There was no humor on his tense face—he didn't move his eyes from Bella. But he said, "No.""Awesome. So you'll enjoy this, bloodsucker—a blonde's brain cells die alone."Rosalie still didn't look at me. "I have killed a hundred times more often than you have, you disgustingbeast. Don't forget that.""Someday, Beauty Queen, you're going to get tired of just threatening me. I'm really looking forward tothat.""Enough, Jacob," Bella said.　　I looked down, and she was scowling at me. It looked like yesterday's good mood was long gone.　　Well, I didn't want to bug her. "You want me to take off?" I offered.　　Before I could hope—or fear—that she'd finally gotten tired of me, she blinked, and her frowndisappeared. She seemed totally shocked that I would come to that conclusion. "No! Of course not."I sighed, and I heard Edward sigh very quietly, too. I knew he wished she'd get over me, too. Too badhe'd never ask her to do anything that might make her unhappy.　　"You look tired," Bella commented.　　"Dead beat," I admitted.　　I'dlike to beat you dead," Rosalie muttered, too low for Bella to hear.　　I just slumped deeper into the chair, getting comfortable. My bare foot dangled closer to Rosalie, andshe stiffened. After a few minutes Bella asked Rosalie for a refill. I felt the wind as Rosalie blew upstairsto get her some more blood. It was really quiet. Might as well take a nap, I figured.　　And then Edward said, "Did you say something?" in a puzzled tone. Strange. Because no one had saidanything, and because Edward's hearing was as good as mine, and he should have known that.　　He was staring at Bella, and she was staring back. They both looked confused.　　"Me?" she asked after a second. "I didn't say anything."He moved onto his knees, leaning forward over her, his expression suddenly intense in a whole differentway. His black eyes focused on her face.　　"What are you thinking about right now?"She stared at him blankly. "Nothing. What's going on?""What were you thinking about a minute ago?" he asked.　　"Just... Esme's island. And feathers."Sounded like total gibberish to me, but then she blushed, and I figured I was better off not knowing.　　"Say something else," he whispered.　　Tike what? Edward, what's going on?"His face changed again, and he did something that made my mouth fall open with a pop. I heard a gaspbehind me, and I knew that Rosalie was back, and just as flabbergasted as I was.　　Edward, very lightly, put both of his hands against her huge, round stomach.　　'The f—" He swallowed. "It... the baby likes the sound of your voice."There was one short beat of total silence. I could not move a muscle, even to blink. Then—"Holy crow, you can hear him!"Bella shouted. In the next second, she winced.　　Edward's hand moved to the top peak of her belly and gently rubbed the spot where it must have kickedher.　　"Shh," he murmured. "You startled it... him."Her eyes got all wide and full of wonder. She patted the side of her stomach. "Sorry, baby."Edward was listening hard, his head tilted toward the bulge.　　"What's he thinking now?" she demanded eagerly.　　"It... he or she, is ..." He paused and looked up into her eyes. His eyes were filled with a similar awe—only his were more careful and grudging. "He's happy" Edward said in an incredulous voice.　　Her breath caught, and it was impossible not to see the fanatical gleam in her eyes. The adoration andthe devotion. Big, fat tears overflowed her eyes and ran silently down her face and over her smiling lips.　　As he stared at her, his face was not frightened or angry or burning or any of the other expressions he'dworn since their return. He was marveling with her.　　"Of course you're happy, pretty baby, of course you are," she crooned, rubbing her stomach while thetears washed her cheeks. "How could you not be, all safe and warm and loved? I love you so much, littleEJ, of course you're happy.""What did you call him?" Edward asked curiously.　　She blushed again. "I sort of named him. I didn't think you would want... well, you know.""EJ?""Your father's name was Edward, too.""Yes, it was. What—?" He paused and then said, "Hmm.""What?""He likes my voice, too.""Of course he does." Her tone was almost gloating now. "You have the most beautiful voice in theuniverse. Who wouldn't love it?""Do you have a backup plan?" Rosalie asked then, leaning over the back of the sofa with the samewondering, gloating look on her face that was on Bella's. "What if he's a she?"Bella wiped the back of her hand under her wet eyes. "I kicked a few things around. Playing with ReneeandEsme. I was thinking... Ruh-nez-may.""Ruhnezmay?""R-e-n-e-s-m-e-e. Too weird?""No, I like it," Rosalie assured her. Their heads were close together, gold and mahogany. "It's beautiful.　　And one of a kind, so that fits""I still think he's an Edward."Edward was staring off into space, his face blank as he listened.　　"What?" Bella asked, her face just glowing away. "What's he thinking now?"At first he didn't answer, and then—shocking all the rest of us again, three distinct and separategasps—he laid his ear tenderly against her belly.　　"He loves you," Edward whispered, sounding dazed. "He absolutely adores you."In that moment, I knew that I was alone. All alone.　　I wanted to kick myself when I realized how much I'd been counting on that loathsome vampire. Howstupid—as if you could ever trust a leech! Of course he would betray me in the end.　　I'd counted on him to be on my side. I'd counted on him to suffer more than I suffered. And, most of all,I'd counted on him to hate that revolting thing killing Bella more than I hated it.　　I'd trusted him with that.　　Yet now they were together, the two of them bent over the budding, invisible monster with their eyes litup like a happy family.　　And I was all alone with my hatred and the pain that was so bad it was like being tortured. Like beingdragged slowly across a bed of razor blades. Pain so bad you'd take death with a smile just to get awayfrom it.　　The heat unlocked my frozen muscles, and I was on my feet.　　All three of their heads snapped up, and I watched my pain ripple across Edward's face as hetrespassed in my head again.　　"Ahh," he choked.　　I didn't know what I was doing; I stood there, trembling, ready to bolt for the very first escape that Icould think of.　　Moving like the strike of a snake, Edward darted to a small end table and ripped something from thedrawer there. He tossed it at me, and I caught the object reflexively.　　"Go, Jacob. Get away from here." He didn't say it harshly—he threw the words at me like they were alife preserver. He was helping me find the escape I was dying for.　　The object in my hand was a set of car keys.
    Chapter 17 What Do I Look Like?
    WHAT DO I LOOK LIKE? THE WIZARD OF OZ? YOU NEED A BRAIN? YOU NEED AHEART? GO AHEAD. TAKE MINE. TAKE EVERYTHING I HAVE.　　I sort of had a plan as I ran to the Cullens' garage. The second part of it was totaling the bloodsucker'scar on my way back.　　So I was at a loss when I mashed the button on the keyless remote, and it was not his Volvo thatbeeped and flashed its lights for me. It was another car—a standout even in the long line of vehicles thatwere mostly all drool-worthy in their own ways.　　Did he actually mean to give me the keys to an Aston Martin Vanquish, or was that an accident?　　I didn't pause to think about it, or if this would change that second part of my plan. I just threw myselfinto the silky leather seat and cranked the engine while my knees were still crunched up under the steeringwheel. The sound of the motor's purr might have made me moan another day, but right now it was all Icould do to concentrate enough to put it in drive.　　I found the seat release and shoved myself back as my foot rammed the pedal down. The car felt almostairborne as it leaped forward.　　It only took seconds to race through the tight, winding drive. The car responded to me like my thoughtswere steering rather than my hands. As I blew out of the green tunnel and onto the highway, I caught afleeting glimpse of Leah's gray face peering uneasily through the ferns.　　For half a second, I wondered what she'd think, and then I realized that I didn't care.　　I turned south, because I had no patience today for ferries or traffic or anything else that meant I mighthave to lift my foot off the pedal.　　In a sick way, it was my lucky day. If by lucky you meant taking a well-traveled highway at two hundredwithout so much as seeing one cop, even in the thirty-mile-an-hour speed-trap towns. What a letdown. Alittle chase actionmight have been nice, not to mention that the license plate info would bring the heat down on the leech.　　Sure, he'd buy his way out of it, but it might have been just a little inconvenient for him.　　The only sign of surveillance i came across was just a hint of dark brown fur flitting through the woods,running parallel to me for a few miles on the south side of Forks. Quil, it looked like. He must have seenme, too, because he disappeared after a minute without raising an alarm. Again, I almost wondered whathis story would be before I remembered that I didn't care.　　I raced around the long U-shaped highway, heading for the biggest city I could find. That was the firstpart of my plan.　　It seemed to take forever, probably because I was still on the razor blades, but it actually didn't eventake two hours before I was driving north into the undefined sprawl that was part Tacoma and partSeattle. I slowed down then, because I really wasn't trying to kill any innocent bystanders.　　This was a stupid plan. It wasn't going to work. But, as I'd searched my head for any way at all to getaway from the pain, what Leah'd said today had popped in there.　　That would go away, you know, if you imprinted. You wouldn't have to hurt over her anymore.　　Seemed like maybe getting your choices taken away from you wasn't the very worst thing in the world.　　Maybe feeling like this was the very worst thing in the world.　　But I'd seen all the girls in La Push and up on the Makah rez and in Forks. I needed a wider huntingrange.　　So how do you look for a random soul mate in a crowd? Well, first, I needed a crowd. So I tooledaround, looking for a likely spot. I passed a couple of malls, which probably would've been pretty goodplaces to find girls my age, but I couldn't make myself stop. Did I want to imprint on some girl who hungout in a mall all day?　　I kept going north, and it got more and more crowded. Eventually, I found a big park full of kids andfamilies and skateboards and bikes and kites and picnics and the whole bit. I hadn't noticed till now—itwas a nice day. Sun and all that. People were out celebrating the blue sky.　　I parked across two handicapped spots—just begging for a ticket—and joined the crowd.　　I walked around for what felt like hours. Long enough that the sun changed sides in the sky. I stared intothe face of every girl who passed anywhere near me, making myself really look, noticing who was prettyand who had blue eyes and who looked good in braces and who had way too much makeup on. I triedto find something interesting about each face, so that I would know for sure that I'd really tried. Thingslike: This one had a really straight nose; that one should pull her hair out of her eyes; this one could dolipstick ads if the rest of her face was as perfect as her mouth___Sometimes they stared back. Sometimes they looked scared—like they were thinking, Who is this bigfreak glaring at me? Sometimes I thought they looked kind of interested, but maybe that was just myego running wild.　　Either way, nothing. Even when I met the eyes of the girl who was—no contest—the hottest girl in thepark and probably in the city, and she stared right back with a speculation that looked like interest, I feltnothing. Just the same desperate drive to find a way out of the pain.　　As time went on, I started noticing all the wrong things. Bella things. This one's hair was the same color.　　That one's eyes were sort of shaped the same. This one's cheekbones cut across her face in just the sameway. That one had the same little crease between her eyes—which made me wonder what she wasworrying about___That was when I gave up. Because it was beyond stupid to think that I had picked exactly the right placeand time and I was going to simply walk into my soul mate just because I was so desperate to.　　It wouldn't make sense to find her here, anyway. If Sam was right, the best place to find my geneticmatch would be in La Push. And, clearly, no one there fit the bill. If Billy was right, then who knew?　　What made for a stronger wolf?　　I wandered back to the car and then slumped against the hood and played with the keys.　　Maybe I was what Leah thought she was. Some kind of dead end that shouldn't be passed on toanother generation. Or maybe it was just that my life was a big, cruel joke, and there was no escape fromthe punch line.　　"Hey, you okay? Hello? You there, with the stolen car."It took me a second to realize that the voice was talking to me, and then another second to decide toraise my head.　　A familiar-looking girl was staring at me, her expression kind of anxious. I knew why I recognized herface—I'd already catalogued this one. Light red-gold hair, fair skin, a few gold-colored frecklessprinkled across her cheeks and nose, and eyes the color of cinnamon.　　"If you're feeling that remorseful over boosting the car," she said, smiling so that a dimple popped out inher chin, "you could always turn yourself in.""It's borrowed, not stolen," I snapped. My voice sounded horrible—like I'd been crying or something.　　Embarrassing.　　"Sure, thatW hold up in court."I glowered. "You need something?""Not really. I was kidding about the car, you know. It's just that... you look really upset aboutsomething. Oh, hey, I'm Lizzie." She held out her hand.　　I looked at it until she let it fall.　　"Anyway...," she said awkwardly, "I was just wondering if I could help. Seemed like you were lookingfor someone before." She gestured toward the park and shrugged.　　"Yeah."She waited.　　I sighed. "I don't need any help. She's not here.""Oh. Sorry.""Me, too," I muttered.　　I looked at the girl again. Lizzie. She was pretty. Nice enough to try to help a grouchy stranger who mustseem nuts. Why couldn't she be the one? Why did everything have to be so freaking complicated? Nicegirl, pretty, and sort of funny. Why not?　　"This is a beautiful car," she said. "It's really a shame they're not making them anymore. I mean, theVantage's body styling is gorgeous, too, but there's just something about the Vanquish___"Nice girl who knew cars. Wow. I stared at her face harder, wishing I knew how to make it work.　　C'mon, Jake— imprint already.　　"How's it drive?" she asked.　　"Like you wouldn't believe," I told her.　　She grinned her one-dimple smile, clearly pleased to have dragged a halfway civil response out of me,and I gave her a reluctant smile back.　　But her smile did nothing about the sharp, cutting blades that raked up and down my body. No matterhow much I wanted it to, my life was not going to come together like that.　　I wasn't in that healthier place where Leah was headed. I wasn't going to be able to fall in love like anormal person. Not when I was bleeding over someone else. Maybe—if it was ten years from now andBella's heart was long dead and I'd hauled myself through the whole grieving process and come out inone piece again—maybe then I could offer Lizzie a ride in a fast car and talk makes and models and getto know something about her and see if I liked her as a person. But that wasn't going to happen now.　　Magic wasn't going to save me. I was just going to have to take the torture like a man. Suck it up.　　Lizzie waited, maybe hoping I was going to offer her that ride. Or maybe not.　　"I'd better get this car back to the guy I borrowed it from," I muttered.　　She smiled again. "Glad to hear you're going straight.""Yeah, you convinced me."She watched me get in the car, still sort of concerned. I probably looked like someone who was aboutto drive off a cliff. Which maybe I would've, if that kind of move'd work for a werewolf. She wavedonce, her eyes trailing after the car.　　At first, I drove more sanely on the way back. I wasn't in a rush. I didn't want to go where I was going.　　Back to that house, back to that forest. Back to the pain I'd run from. Back to being absolutely alonewith it.　　Okay, that was melodramatic. I wouldn't be all alone, but that was a bad thing. Leah and Seth wouldhave to suffer with me. I was glad Seth wouldn't have to suffer long. Kid didn't deserve to have his peaceof mind ruined. Leah didn't, either, but at least it was something she understood. Nothing new about painfor Leah.　　I sighed big as I thought about what Leah wanted from me, because I knew now that she was going toget it. I was still pissed at her, but I couldn't ignore the fact that i could make her life easier. And—nowthat I knew her better—I thought she would probably do this for me, if our positions were reversed.　　It would be interesting, at the very least, and strange, too, to have Leah as a companion—as a friend.　　We were going to get under each other's skin a lot, that was for sure. She wouldn't be one to let mewallow, but I thought that was a good thing. I'd probably need someone to kick my butt now and then.　　But when it came right down to it, she was really the only friend who had any chance of understandingwhat I was going through now.　　I thought of the hunt this morning, and how close our minds had been for that one moment in time. Ithadn't been a bad thing. Different. A little scary, a little awkward. But also nice in a weird way.　　I didn't have to be all alone.　　And I knew Leah was strong enough to face with me the months that were coming. Months and years. Itmade me tired to think about it. I felt like I was staring out across an ocean that I was going to have toswim from shore to shore before I could rest again.　　So much time coming, and then so little time before it started. Before I was flung into that ocean. Threeand a half more days, and here I was, wasting that little bit of time I had.　　I started driving too fast again.　　I saw Sam and Jared, one on either side of the road like sentinels, as I raced up the road toward Forks.　　They were well hidden in the thick branches, but I was expecting them, and I knew what to look for. Inodded as I blew past them, not bothering to wonder what they made of my day trip.　　I nodded to Leah and Seth, too, as I cruised up the Cullens' driveway. It was starting to get dark, andthe clouds were thick on this side of the sound, but I saw their eyes glitter in the glow of the headlights. Iwould explain to them later. There'd be plenty of time for that.　　It was a surprise to find Edward waiting for me in the garage. I hadn't seen him away from Bella in days.　　I could tell from his face that nothing bad had happened to her. In fact, he looked more peaceful thanbefore. My stomach tightened as I remembered where that peace came from.　　It was too bad that—with all my brooding—I'd forgotten to wreck the car. Oh well. I probably wouldn'thave been able to stand hurting this car, anyway. Maybe he'd guessed as much, and that's why he'd lentit to me in the first place.　　"A few things, Jacob," he said as soon as I cut the engine.　　I took a deep breath and held it for a minute. Then, slowly, I got out of the car and threw the keys tohim.　　"Thanks for the loan," I said sourly. Apparently, it would have to be repaid. "What do you want now?""Firstly... I know how averse you are to using your authority with your pack, but..."I blinked, astonished that he would even dream of starting in on this one. "What?""If you can't or won't control Leah, then I—""Leah?" I interrupted, speaking through my teeth. "What happened?"Edward's face was hard. "She came up to see why you'd left so abruptly. I tried to explain. I suppose itmight not have come out right.""What did she do?""She phased to her human form and—""Really?" I interrupted again, shocked this time. I couldn't process that. Leah letting her guard down rightin the mouth of the enemy's lair?　　"She wanted to... speak to Bella.""To Bella?"Edward got all hissy then. "I won't let Bella be upset like that again. I don't care how justified Leahthinks she is! I didn't hurt her—of course I wouldn't—but I'll throw her out of the house if it happensagain. I'll launch her right across the river—""Hold on. What did she say?" None of this was making any sense.　　Edward took a deep breath, composing himself. "Leah was unnecessarily harsh. I'm not going to pretendthat I understand why Bella is unable to let go of you, but I do know that she does not behave this way tohurt you. She suffers a great deal over the pain she's inflicting on you, and on me, by asking you to stay.　　What Leah said was uncalled for. Bella's been crying—""Wait—Leah was yelling at Bella about me?"He nodded one sharp nod. "You were quite vehemently championed."Whoa. "I didn't ask her to do that.""I know."I rolled my eyes. Of course he knew. He knew everything.　　But that was really something about Leah. Who would have believed it? Leah walking into thebloodsuckers' place human to complain about how /was being treated.　　"I can't promise to control Leah," I told him. "I won't do that. But I'll talk to her, okay? And I don't thinkthere'll be a repeat. Leah's not one to hold back, so she probably got it all off her chest today.""I would say so.""Anyway, I'll talk to Bella about it, too. She doesn't need to feel bad. This one's on me.""I already told her that.""Of course you did. Is she okay?""She's sleeping now. Rose is with her."So the psycho was "Rose" now. He'd completely crossed over to the dark side.　　He ignored that thought, continuing with a more complete answer to my question. "She's... better insome ways. Aside from Leah's tirade and the resulting guilt."Better. Because Edward was hearing the monster and everything was all lovey-dovey now. Fantastic.　　"It's a bit more than that," he murmured. "Now that I can make out the child's thoughts, it's apparent thathe or she has remarkably developed mental facilities. He can understand us, to an extent."My mouth fell open. "Are you serious?""Yes. He seems to have a vague sense of what hurts her now. He's trying to avoid that, as much aspossible. He... loves her. Already."I stared at Edward, feeling sort of like my eyes might pop out of their sockets. Underneath that disbelief,I could see right away that this was the critical factor. This was what had changed Edward—that themonster had convinced him of this love. He couldn't hate what loved Bella. It was probably why hecouldn't hate me, either. There was a bigdifference, though. I wasn't killing her.　　Edward went on, acting like he hadn't heard all that. "The progress, I believe, is more than we'd judged.　　When Carlisle returns—""They're not back?" I cut in sharply. I thought of Sam and Jared, watching the road. Would they getcurious as to what was going on?　　"Alice and Jasper are. Carlisle sent all the blood he was able to acquire, but it wasn't as much as he washoping for—Bella will use up this supply in another day the way her appetite has grown. Carlisle stayedto try another source. I don't think that's necessary now, but he wants to be covered for any eventuality.""Why isn't it necessary? If she needs more?"I could tell he was watching and listening to my reaction carefully as he explained. Tm trying to persuadeCarlisle to deliver the baby as soon as he is back.""What?""The child seems to be attempting to avoid rough movements, but it's difficult. He's become too big. It'smadness to wait, when he's clearly developed beyond what Carlisle had guessed. Bella's too fragile todelay."I kept getting my legs knocked out from under me. First, counting on Edward's hatred of the thing somuch. Now, I'd realized that I thought of those four days as a sure thing. I'd banked on them.　　The endless ocean of grief that waited stretched out before me.　　I tried to catch my breath.　　Edward waited. I stared at his face while I recovered, recognizing another change there.　　"You think she's going to make it," I whispered.　　"Yes. That was the other thing I wanted to talk to you about."I couldn't say anything. After a minute, he went on.　　"Yes," he said again. "Waiting, as we have been, for the child to be ready, that was insanely dangerous.　　At any moment it could have been too late. But if we're proactive about this, if we act quickly, I see noreason why it should not go well. Knowing the child's mind is unbelievably helpful. Thankfully, Bella andRose agree with me. Now that I've convinced them it's safe for the child if we proceed, there's nothing tokeep this from working.""When will Carlisle be back?" I asked, still whispering. I hadn't got my breath back yet.　　"By noon tomorrow."My knees buckled. I had to grab the car to hold myself up. Edward reached out like he was offeringsupport, but then he thought better of it and dropped his hands.　　"I'm sorry," he whispered. "I am truly sorry for the pain this causes you, Jacob. Though you hate me, Imust admit that I don't feel the same about you. I think of you as a... a brother in many ways. A comradein arms, at the very least. I regret your suffering more than you realize. But Bella is going to survive"—when he said that his voice was fierce, even violent—"and I know that's what really matters to you."He was probably right. It was hard to tell. My head was spinning.　　"So I hate to do this now, while you're already dealing with too much, but, clearly, there is little time. Ihave to ask you for something—to beg, if I must.""I don't have anything left," I choked out.　　He lifted his hand again, as if to put it on my shoulder, but then let it drop like before and sighed.　　"I know how much you have given," he said quietly. "But this is something you do have, and only you.　　I'm asking this of the true Alpha, Jacob. I'm asking this of Ephraim's heir."I was way past being able to respond.　　"I want your permission to deviate from what we agreed to in our treaty with Ephraim. I want you togrant us an exception. I want your permission to save her life. You know 111 do it anyway, but I don'twant to break faith with you if there is any way to avoid it. We never intended to go back on our word,and we don't do it lightly now. I want your understanding, Jacob, because you know exactly why we dothis. I want the alliance between our families to survive when this is over."I tried to swallow. Sam, I thought. It's Sam you want.　　"No. Sam's authority is assumed. It belongs to you. You'll never take it from him, but no one canrightfully agree to what I'm asking except for you"It's not my decision.　　"It is, Jacob, and you know it. Your word on this will condemn us or absolve us. Only you can give thisto me."/ can't think. I don't know.　　"We don't have much time." He glanced back toward the house.　　No, there was no time. My few days had become a few hours.　　/ don't know. Let me think. Just give me a minute here, okay?　　"Yes."I started walking to the house, and he followed. Crazy how easy it was, walking through the dark with avampire right beside me. It didn't feel unsafe, or even uncomfortable, really. It felt like walking next toanybody. Well, anybody who smelled bad.　　There was a movement in the brush at the edge of the big lawn, and then a low whimper. Seth shruggedthrough the ferns and loped over to us.　　"Hey, kid," I muttered.　　He dipped his head, and I patted his shoulder.　　"S'all cool," I lied. "I'll tell you about it later. Sorry to take off on you like that."He grinned at me.　　"Hey, tell your sister to back off now, okay? Enough."Seth nodded once.　　I shoved against his shoulder this time. "Get back to work. I'll spell you in a bit."Seth leaned against me, shoving back, and then he galloped into the trees.　　"He has one of the purest, sincerest, kindest minds I've ever heard," Edward murmured when he wasoutof sight. "You're lucky to have his thoughts to share.""I know that,"! grunted.　　We started toward the house, and both of our heads snapped up when we heard the sound of someonesucking through a straw. Edward was in a hurry then.He darted up the porch stairs and was gone.　　"Bella, love, Ithought you were sleeping," I heard him say. "I'm sorry, I wouldn't have left.""Don't worry. Ijust got so thirsty—it woke me up.It's a good thing Carlisle is bringing more. This kid isgoing to need it when he gets out of me.""True. That's a good point.""I wonder if he'll want anything else," she mused.　　"I suppose we'll find out."I walked through the door.　　Alice said, "Finally," and Bella's eyes flashed to me. That infuriating, irresistible smile broke across herface for one second. Then it faltered, and her face fell. Her lips puckered, like she was trying not to cry.　　I wanted to punch Leah right in her stupid mouth.　　"Hey, Bells," Isaid quickly. "How ya doing?""I'm fine," she said.　　"Big day today, huh? Lots of new stuff.""You don't have to do that, Jacob.""Don't know what you're talking about," I said, going to sit on the arm of the sofa by her head. Edwardhad the floor there already.　　She gave me a reproachful look. "I'm so s—" she started to say.　　I pinched her lips together between my thumb and finger.　　"Jake," she mumbled, trying to pull my hand away. Her attempt was so weak it was hard to believe thatshe was really trying.　　I shook my head. "You can talk when you're not being stupid.""Fine,I won't say it," it sounded like she mumbled.　　I pulled my hand away.　　"Sorry!" she finished quickly, and then grinned.　　I rolledmy eyes and then smiled back at her.　　When I stared into her eyes, I saw everything that I'd been looking for in the park.　　Tomorrow, she'd be someone else. But hopefully alive, and that was what counted, right? She'd look atme with the same eyes, sort of. Smile with the same lips, almost. She'd still know me better than anyonewho didn't havefull access to the inside of my head.　　Leah might be an interesting companion, maybe even a true friend—someone who would stand up forme. Butshe wasn't my best friend the way thatBella was. Aside from the impossible love I felt for Bella, therewas also that other bond, and it ran bone deep.　　Tomorrow, she'd be my enemy. Or she'd be myally. And, apparently, that distinction was up to me.　　I sighed.　　Fine!I thought, giving up the very last thing i had to give. It made me feel hollow. Go ahead. Save her.　　As Ephraim's heir, you have my permission, my word, that this will not violate the treaty. Theothers will just have to blame me. You were right— they can't deny that it's my right to agree tothis.　　'Thank you." Edward's whisper was low enough that Bella didn't hear anything. But the words were sofervent that, from the corner of my eye, I saw the other vampires turning to stare.　　"So,"Bella asked, working to be casual. "How was your day?""Great. Went for a drive. Hung out in the park.""Sounds nice.""Sure, sure."Suddenly, she made a face. "Rose?" she asked.　　I heard Blondie chuckle. "Again?""I think I've drunk two gallons in the last hour," Bella explained.　　Edward and I both got out of the way while Rosalie came to lift Bella from the couch and take her to thebathroom.　　"Can I walk?" Bella asked. "My legs are so stiff.""Are you sure?" Edward asked.　　"Rose'llcatch me if I trip over my feet. Which could happen pretty easily, since I can't see them."Rosalie set Bellacarefully on her feet, keeping her hands right atBella's shoulders. Bella stretched herarms out in front of her, wincing a little.　　"That feels good," she sighed. "Ugh, but I'm huge."She really was. Her stomach was its own continent.　　"One more day," she said, and patted her stomach.　　I couldn't help the pain that shot through me in a sudden, stabbing burst, but I tried to keep it off myface. I could hide it for one more day, right?　　"All righty, then. Whoops—oh, no!"The cup Bella had left on the sofa tumbled to one side, the dark red blood spilling out onto the palefabric.　　Automatically, though three other hands beat her there, Bella bent over, reaching out to catch it.　　There was the strangest, muffled ripping sound from the center of her body.　　"Oh!" she gasped.　　And then she went totally limp, slumping toward the floor. Rosalie caught her in the same instant, beforeshe could fall. Edward was there, too, hands out, the mess on the sofa forgotten.　　"Bella?" he asked, and then his eyes unfocused, and panic shot across his features.　　A half second later,Bella screamed.　　Itwas not justa scream, it was a blood-curdling shriek of agony. The horrifying sound cut off with agurgle, and her eyes rolled back into her head. Her body twitched, arched in Rosalie's arms, and thenBella vomited a fountain of blood.
    Chapter 18 There Are No Words For THis
    　　Bella's body, streaming with red, started to twitch, jerking around in Rosalie's arms like she was beingelectrocuted. All the while, her face was blank—unconscious. It was the wild thrashing from inside thecenter of her body that moved her. As she convulsed, sharp snaps and cracks kept time with the spasms.　　Rosalie and Edward were frozen for the shortest half second, and then they broke. Rosalie whippedBella's body into her arms, and, shouting so fast it was hard to separate the individual words, she andEdward shot up the staircase to the second floor.　　I sprinted after them.　　"Morphine!" Edward yelled at Rosalie.　　"Alice—get Carlisle on the phone!" Rosalie screeched.　　The room I followed them to looked like an emergency ward set up in the middle of a library. The lightswere brilliant and white. Bella was on a table under the glare, skin ghostly in the spotlight. Her bodyflopped, a fish on the sand. Rosalie pinned Bella down, yanking and ripping her clothes out of the way,while Edward stabbed a syringe into her arm.　　How many times had I imagined her naked? Now I couldn't look. I was afraid to have these memoriesin my head.　　"What's happening, Edward?""He's suffocating!""The placenta must have detached!"Somewhere in this, Bella came around. She responded to their words with a shriek that clawed at myeardrums.　　"Get him OUT!" she screamed. "He can't BREATHE! Do it NOW!"I saw the red spots pop out when her scream broke the blood vessels in her eyes.　　'The morphine—," Edward growled.　　"NO! NOW—!" Another gush of blood choked off what she was shrieking. He held her head up,desperately trying to clear her mouth so that she could breathe again.　　Alice darted into the room and clipped a little blue earpiece under Rosalie's hair. Then Alice backedaway, her gold eyes wide and burning, while Rosalie hissed frantically into the phone.　　In the bright light, Bella's skin seemed more purple and black than it was white. Deep red was seepingbeneath the skin over the huge, shuddering bulge of her stomach. Rosalie's hand came up with a scalpel.　　"Let the morphine spread!" Edward shouted at her.　　"There's no time," Rosalie hissed. "He's dying!"Her hand came down on Bella's stomach, and vivid red spouted out from where she pierced the skin. Itwas like a bucket being turned over, a faucet twisted to full. Bella jerked, but didn't scream. She was stillchoking.　　And then Rosalie lost her focus. I saw the expression on her face shift, saw her lips pull back from herteeth and her black eyes glint with thirst.　　"No, Rose!" Edward roared, but his hands were trapped, trying to prop Bella upright so she couldbreathe.　　I launched myself at Rosalie, jumping across the table without bothering to phase. As I hit her stonebody, knocking her toward the door, I felt the scalpel in her hand stab deep into my left arm. My rightpalm smashed against her face, locking her jaw and blocking her airways.　　I used my grip on Rosalie's face to swing her body out so that I could land a solid kick in her gut; it waslike kicking concrete. She flew into the door frame, buckling one side of it. The little speaker in her earcrackled into pieces. Then Alice was there, yanking her by the throat to get her into the hall.　　And I had to give it to Blondie—she didn't put up an ounce of fight. She wanted us to win. She let metrash her like that, to save Bella. Well, to save the thing.　　I ripped the blade out of my arm.　　'Alice, get her out of here!" Edward shouted. "Take her to Jasper and keep her there! Jacob, I needyou!"I didn't watch Alice finish the job. I wheeled back to the operating table, where Bella was turning blue,her eyes wide and staring.　　"CPR?" Edward growled at me, fast and demanding.　　"Yes!"I judged his face swiftly, looking for any sign that he was going to react like Rosalie. There was nothingbut single-minded ferocity.　　"Get her breathing! I've got to get him out before—"Another shattering crack inside her body, the loudest yet, so loud that we both froze in shock waiting forher answering shriek. Nothing. Her legs, which had been curled up in agony, now went limp, sprawlingout in an unnatural way.　　"Her spine," he choked in horror.　　"Get it out of her!" I snarled, flinging the scalpel at him. "She won't feel anything now!"And then I bent over her head. Her mouth looked clear, so I pressed mine to hers and blew a lungful ofair into it. I felt her twitching body expand, so there was nothing blocking her throat.　　Her lips tasted like blood.　　I could hear her heart, thumping unevenly. Keep it going, I thought fiercely at her, blowing another gustof air into her body. You promised. Keep your heart beating.　　I heard the soft, wet sound of the scalpel across her stomach. More blood dripping to the floor.　　The next sound jolted through me, unexpected, terrifying. Like metal being shredded apart. The soundbrought back the fight in the clearing so many months ago, the tearing sound of the newborns beingripped apart. I glanced over to see Edward's face pressed against the bulge. Vampire teeth—a surefireway to cut through vampire skin.　　I shuddered as I blew more air into Bella.　　She coughed back at me, her eyes blinking, rolling blindly.　　"You stay with me now, Bella!" I yelled at her. "Do you hear me? Stay! You're not leaving me. Keepyour heart beating!"Her eyes wheeled, looking for me, or him, but seeing nothing.　　I stared into them anyway, keeping my gaze locked there.　　And then her body was suddenly still under my hands, though her breathing picked up roughly and herheart continued to thud. I realized the stillness meant that it was over. The internal beating was over. Itmust be out of her.　　It was.　　Edward whispered, "Renesmee."So Bella'd been wrong. It wasn't the boy she'd imagined. No big surprise there. What hadn't she beenwrong about?　　I didn't look away from her red-spotted eyes, but I felt her hands lift weakly.　　"Let me...," she croaked in a broken whisper. "Give her to me."I guess I should have known that he would always give her what she wanted, no matter how stupid herrequest might be. But I didn't dream he would listen to her now. So I didn't think to stop him.　　Something warm touched my arm. That right there should have caught my attention. Nothing felt warmto me.　　But I couldn't look away from Bella's face. She blinked and then stared, finally seeing something. Shemoaned out a strange, weak croon.　　"Renes... mee. So... beautiful."And then she gasped—gasped in pain.　　By the time I looked, it was too late. Edward had snatched the warm, bloody thing out of her limp arms.　　My eyes flickered across her skin. It was red with blood—the blood that had flowed from her mouth, theblood smeared all over the creature, and fresh blood welling out of a tiny double-crescent bite mark justover her left breast.　　"No, Renesmee," Edward murmured, like he was teaching the monster manners.　　I didn't look at him or it. I watched only Bella as her eyes rolled back into her head.　　With a last dull ga-lump, her heart faltered and went silent.　　She missed maybe half of one beat, and then my hands were on her chest, doing compressions, icounted in my head, trying to keep the rhythm steady. One. Two. Three. Four.　　Breaking away for a second, I blew another lungful of air into her.　　I couldn't see anymore. My eyes were wet and blurry. But I was hyperaware of the sounds in the room.　　Theunwillingglug-glug of her heart under my demanding hands, the pounding of my own heart, andanother—a fluttering beat that was too fast, too light. I couldn't place it.　　I forced more air down Bella's throat.　　"What are you waiting for?" I choked out breathlessly, pumping her heart again. One. Two. Three. Four.　　"Take the baby," Edward said urgently.　　'Throw it out the window." One. Two. Three. Four.　　"Give her to me," a low voice chimed from the doorway.　　Edward and I snarled at the same time.　　One. Two. Three. Four.　　"I've got it under control," Rosalie promised. "Give me the baby, Edward. Til take care of her until Bella..."I breathed for Bella again while the exchange took place. The fluttering thumpa-thumpa-thumpa fadedaway with distance.　　"Move your hands, Jacob."I looked up from Bella's white eyes, still pumping her heart for her. Edward had a syringe in his hand—all silver, like it was made from steel.　　"What's that?"His stone hand knocked mine out of the way. There was a tiny crunch as his blow broke my little finger.　　In the same second, he shoved the needle straight into her heart.　　"My venom," he answered as he pushed the plunger down.　　I heard the jolt in her heart, like he'd shocked her with paddles.　　"Keep it moving," he ordered. His voice was ice, was dead. Fierce and unthinking. Like he was amachine.　　I ignored the healing ache in my finger and started pumping her heart again. It was harder, as if her bloodwas congealing there—thicker and slower. While I pushed the now-viscous blood through her arteries, Iwatched what he was doing.　　It was like he was kissing her, brushing his lips at her throat, at her wrists, into the crease at the inside ofher arm. But I could hear the lush tearing of her skin as his teeth bit through, again and again, forcingvenom into her system at as many points as possible. I saw his pale tongue sweep along the bleedinggashes, but before this could make me either sick or angry, I realized what he was doing. Where histongue washed the venom over her skin, it sealed shut. Holding the poison and the blood inside her body.　　I blew more air into her mouth, but there was nothing there. Just the lifeless rise of her chest in response.　　I kept pumping her heart, counting, while he worked manically over her, trying to put her back together.　　All the king's horses and all the king's men...　　But there was nothing there, just me, just him.　　Working over a corpse.　　Because that's all that was left of the girl we both loved. This broken, bled-out, mangled corpse. Wecouldn't put Bella together again.　　I knew it was too late. I knew she was dead. I knew it for sure because the pull was gone. I didn't feelany reason to be here beside her. She wasn't here anymore. So this body had no more draw for me. Thesenseless need to be near her had vanished.　　Or maybe moved was the better word. It seemed like I felt the pull from the opposite direction now.　　From down the stairs, out the door. The longing to get away from here and never, ever come back.　　"Go, then," he snapped, and he hit my hands out of the way again, taking my place this time. Threefingers broken, it felt like.　　I straightened them numbly, not minding the throb of pain.　　He pushed her dead heart faster than I had.　　"She's not dead," he growled. "She's going to be fine."I wasn't sure he was talking to me anymore.　　Turning away, leaving him with his dead, I walked slowly to the door. So slowly. I couldn't make myfeet move faster.　　This was it, then. The ocean of pain. The other shore so far away across the boiling water that I couldn'timagine it, much less see it.　　I felt empty again, now that I'd lost my purpose. Saving Bella had been my fight for so long now. Andshe wouldn't be saved. She'd willingly sacrificed herself to be torn apart by that monster's young, and sothe fight was lost. It was all over.　　I shuddered at the sound coming from behind me as I plodded down the stairs—the sound of a deadheart being forced to thud.　　I wanted to somehow pour bleach inside my head and let it fry my brain. To burn away the images leftfrom Bella's final minutes. I'd take the brain damage if I could get rid of that—the screaming, thebleeding, the unbearable crunching and snapping as the newborn monster tore through her from the insideout___I wanted to sprint away, to take the stairs ten at a time and race out the door, but my feet were heavy asiron and my body was more tired than it had ever been before. I shuffled down the stairs like a crippledold man.　　I rested at the bottom step, gathering my strength to get out the door.　　Rosalie was on the clean end of the white sofa, her back to me, cooing and murmuring to theblanket-wrapped thing in her arms. She must have heard me pause, but she ignored me, caught up in hermoment of stolenRjesavate i>itanje brqj 10 odiikiiiio 11Koje od dole navednih tvrdnji su tacne.　　1. Neke od Windows XP aplikacija koriste samo jedan jedini proces u toku svog izvrsavanja2. Neke od Windows XP aplikacija koriste vise procesa u toku svog izvrsavanja3. Za svaki proces Windows Task Manager nudi sljedece opcije: Mem Usage, CPU, Image Name,User Name, Password4. Sve od gore navedenih su tacne5. Niti jedna od gore navedenih je tacna6. Ma ovo ni Bill Gates nezna!　　Ponisti odgovorIdi na pitanje broj: 10 |_^Jmotherhood. Maybe she would be happy now. Rosalie had what she wanted, and Bella would nevercome to take the creature from her. I wondered if that's what the poisonous blonde had been hoping forall along.　　She held something dark in her hands, and there was a greedy sucking sound coming from the tinymurderer she held.　　The scent of blood in the air. Human blood. Rosalie was feeding it. Of course it would want blood.　　What else would you feed the kind of monster that would brutally mutilate its own mother? It might aswell have been drinking Bella's blood. Maybe it was.　　My strength came back to me as I listened to the sound of the little executioner feeding.　　Strength and hate and heat—red heat washing through my head, burning but erasing nothing. The imagesin my head were fuel, building up the inferno but refusing to be consumed. I felt the tremors rock me fromhead to toe, and I did not try to stop them.　　Rosalie was totally absorbed in the creature, paying no attention to me at all. She wouldn't be quickenough to stop me, distracted as she was.　　Sam had been right. The thing was an aberration—its existence went against nature. A black, soullessdemon. Something that had no right to be.　　Something that had to be destroyed.　　It seemed like the pull had not been leading to the door after all. I could feel it now, encouraging me,tugging me forward. Pushing me to finish this, to cleanse the world of this abomination.　　Rosalie would try to kill me when the creature was dead, and I would fight back. I wasn't sure if I wouldhave time to finish her before the others came to help. Maybe, maybe not. I didn't much care either way.　　I didn't care if the wolves, either set, avenged me or called the Cullens' justice fair. None of thatmattered. All I cared about was my own justice. My revenge. The thing that had killed Bella would notlive another minute longer.　　If Bella'd survived, she would have hated me for this. She would have wanted to kill me personally.　　But I didn't care. She didn't care what she had done to me—letting herself be slaughtered like an animal.　　Why should I take her feelings into account?　　And then there was Edward. He must be too busy now—too far gone in his insane denial, trying toreanimate a corpse—to listen to my plans.　　So I wouldn't get the chance to keep my promise to him, unless—and it was not a wager I'd put moneyon—I managed to win the fight against Rosalie, Jasper, and Alice, three on one. But even if I did win, Ididn't think I had it in me to kill Edward.　　Because I didn't have enough compassion for that. Why should I let him get away from what he'd done?　　Wouldn't it be more fair—more satisfying—to let him live with nothing, nothing at all?　　It made me almost smile, as filled with hate as I was, to imagine it. No Bella. No killer spawn. And alsomissing as many members of his family as I was able to take down. Of course, he could probably putthose back together, since i wouldn't be around to burn them. Unlike Bella, who would never be wholeagain.　　I wondered if the creature could be put back together. I doubted it. It was part Bella, too—so it musthave inherited some of her vulnerability. I could hear that in the tiny, thrumming beat of its heart.　　Its heart was beating. Hers wasn't.　　Only a second had passed as I made these easy decisions.　　The trembling was getting tighter and faster. I coiled myself, preparing to spring at the blond vampire andrip the murderous thing from her arms with my teeth.　　Rosalie cooed at the creature again, setting the empty metal bottle-thing aside and lifting the creature intothe air to nuzzle her face against its cheek.　　Perfect. The new position was perfect for my strike. I leaned forward and felt the heat begin to changeme while the pull toward the killer grew—it was stronger than I'd ever felt it before, so strong it remindedme of an Alpha's command, like it would crush me if I didn't obey.　　This time I wanted to obey.　　The murderer stared past Rosalie's shoulder at me, its gaze more focused than any newborn creature'sgaze should be.　　Warm brown eyes, the color of milk chocolate—the exact same color that Bella's had been.　　My shaking jerked to a stop; heat flooded through me, stronger than before, but it was a new kind ofheat—not a burning.　　It was a glowing.　　Everything inside me came undone as I stared at the tiny porcelain face of the half-vampire, half-humanbaby. All the lines that held me to my life were sliced apart in swift cuts, like clipping the strings to abunch of balloons. Everything that made me who I was—my love for the dead girl upstairs, my love formy father, my loyalty to my new pack, the love for my other brothers, my hatred for my enemies, myhome, my name, my se/f—disconnected from me in that second— snip, snip, snip—and floated up intospace.　　I was not left drifting. A new string held me where I was.　　Not one string, but a million. Not strings, but steel cables. A million steel cables all tying me to one thing—to the very center of the universe.　　I could see that now—how the universe swirled around this one point. I'd never seen the symmetry ofthe universe before, but now it was plain.　　The gravity of the earth no longer tied me to the place where I stood.　　It was the baby girl in the blond vampire's arms that held me here now.　　Renesmee.　　From upstairs, there was a new sound. The only sound that could touch me in this endless instant. Afrantic pounding, a racing beat...　　A changing heart.
    Chapter 19 Burning
    The pain was bewildering.　　Exactly that—I was bewildered. I couldn't understand, couldn't make sense of what was happening.　　My body tried to reject the pain, and I was sucked again and again into a blackness that cut out wholeseconds or maybe even minutes of the agony, making it that much harder to keep up with reality.　　I tried to separate them.　　Non-reality was black, and it didn't hurt so much.　　Reality was red, and it felt like I was being sawed in half, hit by a bus, punched by a prize fighter,trampled by bulls, and submerged in acid, all at the same time.　　Reality was feeling my body twist and flip when I couldn't possibly move because of the pain.　　Reality was knowing there was something so much more important than all this torture, and not beingable to remember what it was.　　Reality had come on so fast.　　One moment, everything was as it should have been. Surrounded by people I loved. Smiles. Somehow,unlikely as it was, it seemed like I was about to get everything I'd been fighting for.　　And then one tiny, inconsequential thing had gone wrong.　　I'd watched as my cup tilted, dark blood spilling out and staining the perfect white, and I'd lurchedtoward the accident reflexively. I'd seen the other, faster hands, but my body had continued to reach, tostretch___Inside me, something had yanked the opposite direction.　　Ripping. Breaking. Agony.　　The darkness had taken over, and then washed away to a wave of torture. I couldn't breathe—I haddrowned once before, and this was different; it was too hot in my throat.　　Pieces of me shattering, snapping, slicing apart___More blackness.　　Voices, this time, shouting, as the pain came back.　　'The placenta must have detached!"Something sharper than knives ripped through me—the words, making sense in spite of the othertortures. Detached placenta —I knew what that meant. It meant that my baby was dying inside me.　　"Get him out!" I screamed to Edward. Why hadn't he done it yet? "He can't breathe! Do it now!""The morphine—"He wanted to wait, to give me painkillers, while our baby was dying?!　　"No! Now—," I choked, unable to finish.　　Black spots covered the light in the room as a cold point of new pain stabbed icily into my stomach. Itfelt wrong—I struggled automatically to protect my womb, my baby, my little Edward Jacob, but I wasweak. My lungs ached, oxygen burned away.　　The pain faded away again, though I clung to it now. My baby, my baby, dying___How long had passed? Seconds or minutes? The pain was gone. Numb. I couldn't feel. I still couldn'tsee, either, but I could hear. There was air in my lungs again, scraping in rough bubbles up and down mythroat.　　"You stay with me now, Bella! Do you hear me? Stay! You're not leaving me. Keep your heart beating!"Jacob? Jacob, still here, still trying to save me.　　Of course,I wanted to tell him. Of course I would keep my heart beating. Hadn't I promised them both?　　I tried to feel my heart, to find it, but I was so lost inside my own body. I couldn't feel the things I should,and nothing felt in the right place. I blinked and I found my eyes. I could see the light. Not what I waslooking for, but better than nothing.　　As my eyes struggled to adjust, Edward whispered, "Renesmee."Renesmee?　　Not the pale and perfect son of my imagination? I felt a moment of shock. And then a flood of warmth.　　Renesmee.　　I willed my lips to move, willed the bubbles of air to turn into whispers on my tongue. I forced my numbhands to reach.　　"Let me... Give her to me."The light danced, shattering off Edward's crystal hands. The sparkles were tinged with red, with theblood that covered his skin. And more red in his hands. Something small and struggling, dripping withblood. He touched the warm body to my weak arms, almost like I was holding her. Her wet skin was hot—as hot as Jacob's.　　My eyes focused; suddenly everything was absolutely clear.　　Renesmee did not cry, but she breathed in quick, startled pants. Her eyes were open, her expression soshocked it was almost funny. The little, perfectly round head was covered in a thick layer of matted,bloody curls. Heririses were a familiar—but astonishing—chocolate brown. Under the blood, her skin looked pale, acreamy ivory. All besides her cheeks, which flamed with color.　　Her tiny face was so absolutely perfect that it stunned me. She was even more beautiful than her father.　　Unbelievable. Impossible.　　"Renesmee," I whispered. "So... beautiful."The impossible face suddenly smiled—a wide, deliberate smile. Behind the shell-pink lips was a fullcomplement of snowy milk teeth.　　She leaned her head down, against my chest, burrowing against the warmth. Her skin was warm andsilky, but it didn't give the way mine did.　　Then there was pain again—just one warm slash of it. I gasped.　　And she was gone. My angel-faced baby was nowhere. I couldn't see or feel her.　　No!I wanted to shout. Give her back to me!　　But the weakness was too much. My arms felt like empty rubber hoses for a moment, and then they feltlike nothing at all. I couldn't feel them. I couldn't feel me.　　The blackness rushed over my eyes more solidly than before. Like a thick blindfold, firm and fast.　　Covering not just my eyes but also my self with a crushing weight. It was exhausting to push against it. Iknew it would be so much easier to give in. To let the blackness push me down, down, down to a placewhere there was no pain and no weariness and no worry and no fear.　　If it had only been for myself, I wouldn't have been able to struggle very long. I was only human, with nomore than human strength. I'd been trying to keep up with the supernatural for too long, like Jacob hadsaid.　　But this wasn't just about me.　　If I did the easy thing now, let the black nothingness erase me, I would hurt them.　　Edward. Edward. My life and his were twisted into a single strand. Cut one, and you cut both. If hewere gone, I would not be able to live through that. If I were gone, he wouldn't live through it, either.　　And a world without Edward seemed completely pointless. Edward had to exist.　　Jacob—who'd said goodbye to me over and over but kept coming back when I needed him. Jacob,who I'd wounded so many times it was criminal. Would I hurt him again, the worst way yet? He'd stayedfor me, despite everything. Now all he asked was that I stay for him.　　But it was so dark here that I couldn't see either of their faces. Nothing seemed real. That made it hardnot to give up.　　I kept pushing against the black, though, almost a reflex. I wasn't trying to lift it. I was just resisting. Notallowing it to crush me completely. I wasn't Atlas, and the black felt as heavy as a planet; I couldn'tshoulder it. All I could do was not be entirely obliterated.　　It was sort of the pattern to my life—I'd never been strong enough to deal with the things outside mycontrol, to attack the enemies or outrun them. To avoid the pain. Always human and weak, the only thingI'd ever been able todo was keep going. Endure. Survive.　　It had been enough up to this point. It would have to be enough today. I would endure this until helpcame.　　I knew Edward would be doing everything he could. He would not give up. Neither would I.　　I held the blackness of nonexistence at bay by inches.　　It wasn't enough, though—that determination. As the time ground on and on and the darkness gained bytiny eighths and sixteenths of my inches, I needed something more to draw strength from.　　I couldn't pull even Edward's face into view. Not Jacob's, not Alice's or Rosalie's or Charlie's orRenee's or Carlisle's or Esme's... Nothing. It terrified me, and I wondered if it was too late.　　I felt myself slipping—there was nothing to hold on to.　　No!I had to survive this. Edward was depending on me. Jacob. Charlie Alice Rosalie Carlisle ReneeEsme...　　Renesmee.　　And then, though I still couldn't see anything, suddenly I could feel something. Like phantom limbs, Iimagined I could feel my arms again. And in them, something small and hard and very, very warm.　　My baby. My little nudger.　　I had done it. Against the odds, I had been strong enough to survive Renesmee, to hold on to her untilshe was strong enough to live without me.　　That spot of heat in my phantom arms felt so real. I clutched it closer. It was exactly where my heartshould be. Holding tight the warm memory of my daughter, I knew that I would be able to fight thedarkness as long as I needed to.　　The warmth beside my heart got more and more real, warmer and warmer. Hotter. The heat was so realit was hard to believe that I was imagining it.　　Hotter.　　Uncomfortable now. Too hot. Much, much too hot.　　Like grabbing the wrong end of a curling iron—my automatic response was to drop the scorching thingin my arms. But there was nothing in my arms. My arms were not curled to my chest. My arms weredead things lying somewhere at my side. The heat was inside me.　　The burning grew—rose and peaked and rose again until it surpassed anything I'd ever felt.　　I felt the pulse behind the fire raging now in my chest and realized that I'd found my heart again, just intime to wish I never had. To wish that I'd embraced the blackness while I'd still had the chance. I wantedto raise my arms and claw my chest open and rip the heart from it—anything to get rid of this torture. ButI couldn't feel my arms, couldn't move one vanished finger.　　James, snapping my leg under his foot. That was nothing. That was a soft place to rest on a feather bed.　　I'd take that now, a hundred times. A hundred snaps. I'd take it and be grateful.　　The baby, kicking my ribs apart, breaking her way through me piece by piece. That was nothing. Thatwas floating in a pool of cool water. I'd take it a thousand times. Take it and be grateful.　　The fire blazed hotter and I wanted to scream. To beg for someone to kill me now, before I lived onemore second in this pain. But I couldn't move my lips. The weight was still there, pressing on me.　　I realized it wasn't the darkness holding me down; it was my body. So heavy. Burying me in the flamesthat were chewing their way out from my heart now, spreading with impossible pain through myshoulders and stomach, scalding their way up my throat, licking at my face.　　Why couldn't I move? Why couldn't I scream? This wasn't part of the stories.　　My mind was unbearably clear—sharpened by the fierce pain—and I saw the answer almost as soon asI could form the questions.　　The morphine.　　It seemed like a million deaths ago that we'd discussed it—Edward, Carlisle, and I. Edward and Carlislehad hoped that enough painkillers would help fight the pain of the venom. Carlisle had tried with Emmett,but the venom had burned ahead of the medicine, sealing his veins. There hadn't been time for it tospread.　　I'd kept my face smooth and nodded and thanked my rarely lucky stars that Edward could not read mymind.　　Because I'd had morphine and venom together in my system before, and I knew the truth. I knew thenumbness of the medicine was completely irrelevant while the venom seared through my veins. Butthere'd been no way I was going to mention that fact. Nothing that would make him more unwilling tochange me.　　I hadn't guessed that the morphine would have this effect—that it would pin me down and gag me. Holdme paralyzed while I burned.　　I knew all the stories. I knew that Carlisle had kept quiet enough to avoid discovery while he burned. Iknew that, according to Rosalie, it did no good to scream. And I'd hoped that maybe I could be likeCarlisle. That I would believe Rosalie's words and keep my mouth shut. Because I knew that everyscream that escaped my lips would torment Edward.　　Now it seemed like a hideous joke that i was getting my wish fulfilled.　　If I couldn't scream, how could I tell them to kill me?　　All I wanted was to die. To never have been born. The whole of my existence did not outweigh thispain. Wasn't worth living through it for one more heartbeat.　　Let me die, let me die, let me die.　　And, for a never-ending space, that was all there was. Just the fiery torture, and my soundless shrieks,pleading for death to come. Nothing else, not even time. So that made it infinite, with no beginning and noend. One infinite moment of pain.　　The only change came when suddenly, impossibly, my pain was doubled. The lower half of my body,deadened since before the morphine, was suddenly on fire, too. Some broken connection had beenhealed—knitted together by the scorching fingers of the flame.　　The endless burn raqed on.　　It could have been seconds or days, weeks or years, but, eventually, time came to mean somethingagain.　　Three things happened together, grew from each other so that I didn't know which came first: timerestarted, the morphine's weight faded, and I got stronger.　　I could feel the control of my body come back to me in increments, and those increments were my firstmarkers of the time passing. I knew it when I was able to twitch my toes and twist my fingers into fists. Iknew it, but I did not act on it.　　Though the fire did not decrease one tiny degree—in fact, I began to develop a new capacity forexperiencing it, a new sensitivity to appreciate, separately, each blistering tongue of flame that lickedthrough my veins—I discovered that I could think around it.　　I could remember why I shouldn't scream. I could remember the reason why I'd committed to enduringthis unendurable agony. I could remember that, though it felt impossible now, there was something thatmight be worth the torture.　　This happened just in time for me to hold on when the weights left my body. To anyone watching me,there would be no change. But for me, as I struggled to keep the screams and thrashing locked up insidemy body, where they couldn't hurt anyone else, it felt like I'd gone from being tied to the stake as Iburned, to gripping that stake to hold myself in the fire.　　I had just enough strength to lie there unmoving while I was charred alive.　　My hearing got clearer and clearer, and I could count the frantic, pounding beats of my heart to mark thetime.　　I could count the shallow breaths that gasped through my teeth.　　I could count the low, even breaths that came from somewhere close beside me. These moved slowest,so I concentrated on them. They meant the most time passing. More even than a clock's pendulum, thosebreaths pulled me through the burning seconds toward the end.　　I continued to get stronger, my thoughts clearer. When new noises came, I could listen.　　There were light footsteps, the whisper of air stirred by an opening door. The footsteps gotcloser, and Ifelt pressure against the inside of my wrist. I couldn't feel the coolness of the fingers. The fire blisteredaway every memory of cool.　　"Still no change?""None."The lightest pressure, breath against my scorched skin.　　"There's no scent of the morphine left.""I know.""Bella? Can you hear me?"I knew, beyond all doubt, that if I unlocked my teeth I would lose it—I would shriek and screech andwrithe andthrash. If I opened my eyes, if I so much as twitched a finger—any change at all would be the end of mycontrol.　　"Bella? Bella, love? Can you open your eyes? Can you squeeze my hand?"Pressure on my fingers. It was harder not to answer this voice, but I stayed paralyzed. I knew that thepain in his voice now was nothing compared to what it could be. Right now he only feared that I wassuffering.　　"Maybe... Carlisle, maybe I was too late." His voice was muffled; it broke on the word late.　　My resolve wavered for a second.　　"Listen to her heart, Edward. It's stronger than even Emmett's was. I've never heard anything so vital.　　Shell be perfect."Yes, I was right to keep quiet. Carlisle would reassure him. He didn't need to suffer with me.　　"And her—her spine?""Her injuries weren't so much worse than Esme's. The venom will heal her as it did Esme.""But she's so still. I must have done something wrong.""Or something right, Edward. Son, you did everything I could have and more. I'm not sure I would havehad the persistence, the faith it took to save her. Stop berating yourself. Bella is going to be fine."A broken whisper. "She must be in agony.""We don't know that. She had so much morphine in her system. We don't know the effect that will haveon her experience."Faint pressure inside the crease of my elbow. Another whisper. "Bella, I love you. Bella, I'm sorry."I wanted so much to answer him, but I wouldn't make his pain worse. Not while I had the strength tohold myself still.　　Through all this, the racking fire went right on burning me. But there was so much space in my head now.　　Room to ponder their conversation, room to remember what had happened, room to look ahead to thefuture, with still endless room left over to suffer in.　　Also room to worry.　　Where was my baby? Why wasn't she here? Why weren't they talking about her?　　"No, I'm staying right here," Edward whispered, answering an unspoken thought. "They'll sort it out.""An interesting situation," Carlisle responded. "And I'd thought I'd seen just about everything.""I'll deal with it later. We'll deal with it." Something pressed softly to my blistering palm.　　"I'm sure, between the five of us, we can keep it from turning into bloodshed."Edward sighed. "I don't know which side to take. I'd love to flog them both. Well, later.""I wonder what Bella will think—whose side she'll take," Carlisle mused.　　One low, strained chuckle. "I'm sure she'll surprise me. She always does."Carlisle's footsteps faded away again, and I was frustrated that there was no further explanation. Werethey talking so mysteriously just to annoy me?　　I went back to counting Edward's breaths to mark the time.　　Ten thousand, nine hundred forty-three breaths later, a different set of footsteps whispered into theroom. Lighter. More... rhythmic.　　Strange that I could distinguish the minute differences between footsteps that I'd never been able to hearat all before today.　　"How much longer?" Edward asked.　　"It won't be long now," Alice told him. "See how clear she's becoming? I can see her so much better."She sighed.　　"Still feeling a little bitter?""Yes, thanks so much for bringing it up," she grumbled. "You would be mortified, too, if you realized thatyou were handcuffed by your own nature. I see vampires best, because I am one; I see humans okay,because I was one. But I can't see these odd half-breeds at all because they're nothing I've experienced.　　Bah!""Focus, Alice.""Right. Bella's almost too easy to see now."There was a long moment of silence, and then Edward sighed. It was a new sound, happier.　　"She's really going to be fine," he breathed.　　"Of course she is.""You weren't so sanguine two days ago.""I couldn't see right two days ago. But now that she's free of all the blind spots, it's a piece of cake.""Could you concentrate for me? On the clock—give me an estimate."Alice sighed. "So impatient. Fine. Give me a sec—"Quiet breathing.　　"Thank you, Alice." His voice was brighter.　　How long?Couldn't they at least say it aloud for me? Was that too much to ask? How many moreseconds would I burn? Ten thousand? Twenty? Another day—eighty-six thousand, four hundred? Morethan that?　　"She's going to be dazzling."Edward growled quietly. "She always has been."Alice snorted. "You know what I mean. Look at her."Edward didn't answer, but Alice's words gave me hope that maybe I didn't resemble the charcoalbriquette I felt like. It seemed as if I must be just a pile of charred bones by now. Every cell in my bodyhad been razed to ash.　　I heard Alice breeze out of the room. I heard the swish of the fabric she moved, rubbing against itself. Iheard the quiet buzz of the light hanging from the ceiling. I heard the faint wind brushing against theoutside of the house. I could hear everything.　　Downstairs, someone was watching a ball game. The Mariners were winning by two runs.　　"It's my turn" I heard Rosalie snap at someone, and there was a low snarl in response.　　"Hey, now," Emmett cautioned.　　Someone hissed.　　I listened for more, but there was nothing but the game. Baseball was not interesting enough to distractme from the pain, so I listened to Edward's breathing again, counting the seconds.　　Twenty-one thousand, nine hundred seventeen and a half seconds later, the pain changed.　　On the good-news side of things, it started to fade from my fingertips and toes. Fading slowly, but atleast it was doing something new. This had to be it. The pain was on its way out...　　And then the bad news. The fire in my throat wasn't the same as before. I wasn't only on fire, but I wasnow parched, too. Dry as bone. So thirsty. Burning fire, and burning thirst...　　Also bad news: The fire inside my heart got hotter.　　How was that possible?　　My heartbeat, already too fast, picked up—the fire drove its rhythm to a new frantic pace.　　"Carlisle," Edward called. His voice was low but clear. I knew that Carlisle would hear it, if he were inor near the house.　　The fire retreated from my palms, leaving them blissfully pain-free and cool. But it retreated to my heart,which blazed hot as the sun and beat at a furious new speed.　　Carlisle entered the room, Alice at his side. Their footsteps were so distinct, I could even tell thatCarlisle was on the right, and a foot ahead of Alice.　　"Listen," Edward told them.　　The loudest sound in the room was my frenzied heart, pounding to the rhythm of the fire.　　"Ah," Carlisle said. "It's almost over."My relief at his words was overshadowed by the excruciating pain in my heart.　　My wrists were free, though, and my ankles. The fire was totally extinguished there.　　"Soon," Alice agreed eagerly. "I'll get the others. Should I have Rosalie... ?""Yes—keep the baby away."What? No. No! What did he mean, keep my baby away? What was he thinking?　　My fingers twitched—the irritation breaking through my perfect facade. The room went silent besidesthe jack-hammering of my heart as they all stopped breathing for a second in response.　　A hand squeezed my wayward fingers. "Bella? Bella, love?"Could I answer him without screaming? I considered that for a moment, and then the fire ripped hotterstill through my chest, draining in from my elbows and knees. Better not to chance it.　　'Til bring them right up," Alice said, an urgent edge to her tone, and I heard the swish of wind as shedarted away.　　And then— oh!　　My heart took off, beating like helicopter blades, the sound almost a single sustained note; it felt like itwould grind through my ribs. The fire flared up in the center of my chest, sucking the last remnants of theflames from therest of my body to fuel the most scorching blaze yet. The pain was enough to stun me, to break throughmy iron grip on the stake. My back arched, bowed as if the fire was dragging me upward by my heart.　　I allowed no other piece of my body to break rank as my torso slumped back to the table.　　It became a battle inside me—my sprinting heart racing against the attacking fire. Both were losing. Thefire was doomed, having consumed everything that was combustible; my heart galloped toward its lastbeat.　　The fire constricted, concentrating inside that one remaining human organ with a final, unbearable surge.　　The surge was answered by a deep, hollow-sounding thud. My heart stuttered twice, and then thuddedquietly again just once more.　　There was no sound. No breathing. Not even mine.　　For a moment, the absence of pain was all I could comprehend.　　And then I opened my eyes and gazed above me in wonder.
    Chapter 20 New
    Everything was so clear.　　Sharp. Defined.　　The brilliant light overhead was still blinding-bright, and yet I could plainly see the glowing strands of thefilaments inside the bulb. I could see each color of the rainbow in the white light, and, at the very edge ofthe spectrum, an eighth color I had no name for.　　Behind the light, I could distinguish the individual grains in the dark wood ceiling above. In front of it, Icould see the dust motes in the air, the sides the light touched, and the dark sides, distinct and separate.　　They spun like little planets, moving around each other in a celestial dance.　　The dust was so beautiful that I inhaled in shock; the air whistled down my throat, swirling the motes intoa vortex. The action felt wrong. I considered, and realized the problem was that there was no relief tiedto the action. I didn't need the air. My lungs weren't waiting for it. They reacted indifferently to the influx.　　I did not need the air, but I liked it. In it, I could taste the room around me—taste the lovely dust motes,the mix of the stagnant air mingling with the flow of slightly cooler air from the open door. Taste a lushwhiff of silk. Taste a faint hint of something warm and desirable, something that should be moist, butwasn't... That smell made my throat burn dryly, a faint echo of the venom burn, though the scent wastainted by the bite of chlorine and ammonia. And most of all, I could taste analmost-honey-lilac-and-sun-flavored scent that was the strongest thing, the closest thing to me.　　I heard the sound of the others, breathing again now that I did. Their breath mixed with the scent thatwas something just off honey and lilac and sunshine, bringing new flavors. Cinnamon, hyacinth, pear,seawater, rising bread, pine, vanilla, leather, apple, moss, lavender, chocolate.... I traded a dozendifferent comparisons in my mind, but none of them fit exactly. So sweet and pleasant.　　The TV downstairs had been muted, and I heard someone—Rosalie?—shift her weight on the first floor.　　I also heard a faint, thudding rhythm, with a voice shouting angrily to the beat. Rap music? I wasmystified for a moment, and then the sound faded away like a car passing by with the windows rolleddown.　　With a start, I realized that this could be exactly right. Could I hear all the way to the freeway?　　I didn't realize someone was holding my hand until whoever it was squeezed it lightly. Like it had beforeto hide the pain, my body locked down again in surprise. This was not a touch I expected. The skin wasperfectly smooth, but it was the wrong temperature. Not cold.　　After that first frozen second of shock, my body responded to the unfamiliar touch in a way that shockedme even more.　　Air hissed up my throat, spitting through my clenched teeth with a low, menacing sound like a swarm ofbees. Before the sound was out, my muscles bunched and arched, twisting away from the unknown. Iflipped off my back in a spin so fast it should have turned the room into an incomprehensible blur—but itdid not. I saw every dust mote, every splinter in the wood-paneled walls, every loose thread inmicroscopic detail as my eyes whirled past them.　　So by the time I found myself crouched against the wall defensively—about a sixteenth of a secondlater—I already understood what had startled me, and that I had overreacted.　　Oh. Of course. Edward wouldn't feel cold to me. We were the same temperature now.　　I held my pose for an eighth of a second longer, adjusting to the scene before me.　　Edward was leaning across the operating table that had been my pyre, his hand reached out toward me,his expression anxious.　　Edward's face was the most important thing, but my peripheral vision catalogued everything else, just incase. Some instinct to defend had been triggered, and I automatically searched for any sign of danger.　　My vampire family waited cautiously against the far wall by the door, Emmett and Jasper in the front.　　Like there was danger. My nostrils flared, searching for the threat. I could smell nothing out of place.　　That faint scent of something delicious—but marred by harsh chemicals—tickled my throat again, settingit to aching and burning.　　Alice was peeking around Jasper's elbow with a huge grin on her face; the light sparkled off her teeth,another eight-color rainbow.　　That grin reassured me and then put the pieces together. Jasper and Emmett were in the front to protectthe others, as I had assumed. What I hadn't grasped immediately was that / was the danger.　　All this was a sideline. The greater part of my senses and my mind were still focused on Edward's face.　　I had never seen it before this second.　　How many times had I stared at Edward and marveled over his beauty? How many hours—days,weeks—of my life had I spent dreaming about what I then deemed to be perfection? I thought I'd knownhis face better than my own. I'd thought this was the one sure physical thing in my whole world: theflawlessness of Edward's face.　　I may as well have been blind.　　For the first time, with the dimming shadows and limiting weakness of humanity taken off my eyes, I sawhis face. I gasped and then struggled with my vocabulary, unable to find the right words. I needed betterwords.　　At this point, the other part of my attention had ascertained that there was no danger here besidesmyself, and I automatically straightened out of my crouch; almost a whole second had passed since I'dbeen on the table.　　I was momentarily preoccupied by the way my body moved. The instant I'd considered standing erect, Iwas already straight. There was no brief fragment of time in which the action occurred; change wasinstantaneous, almost as if there was no movement at all.　　I continued to stare at Edward's face, motionless again.　　He moved slowly around the table—each step taking nearly half a second, each step flowing sinuouslylike river water weaving over smooth stones—his hand still outstretched.　　I watched the grace of his advance, absorbing it with my new eyes.　　"Bella?" he asked in a low, calming tone, but the worry in his voice layered my name with tension.　　I could not answer immediately, lost as I was in the velvet folds of his voice. It was the most perfectsymphony, a symphony in one instrument, an instrument more profound than any created by man___"Bella, love? I'm sorry, I know it's disorienting. But you're all right. Everything is fine."Everything? My mind spun out, spiraling back to my last human hour. Already, the memory seemed dim,like I was watching through a thick, dark veil—because my human eyes had been half blind. Everythinghad been so blurred.　　When he said everything was fine, did that include Renesmee? Where was she? With Rosalie? I tried toremember her face—I knew that she had been beautiful—but it was irritating to try to see through thehuman memories. Her face was shrouded in darkness, so poorly lit___What about Jacob? Was he fine? Did my long-suffering best friend hate me now? Had he gone back toSam's pack? Seth and Leah, too?　　Were the Cullens safe, or had my transformation ignited the war with the pack? Did Edward's blanketassurance cover all of that? Or was he just trying to calm me?　　And Charlie? What would I tell him now? He must have called while I was burning. What had they toldhim? What did he think had happened to me?　　As I deliberated for one small piece of a second over which question to ask first, Edward reached outtentatively and stroked his fingertips across my cheek. Smooth as satin, soft as a feather, and now exactlymatched to the temperature of my skin.　　His touch seemed to sweep beneath the surface of my skin, right through the bones of my face. Thefeeling was tingly, electric—it jolted through my bones, down my spine, and trembled in my stomach.　　Wait,I thought as the trembling blossomed into a warmth, a yearning. Wasn't I supposed to lose this?　　Wasn't giving up this feeling a part of the bargain?　　I was a newborn vampire. The dry, scorching ache in my throat gave proof to that. And I knew whatbeing a newborn entailed. Human emotions and longings would come back to me later in some form, butI'd accepted that I would not feel them in the beginning. Only thirst. That was the deal, the price. I'dagreed to pay it.　　But as Edward's hand curled to the shape of my face like satin-covered steel, desire raced through mydried-out veins, singing from my scalp to my toes.　　He arched one perfect eyebrow, waiting for me to speak.　　I threw my arms around him.　　Again, it was like there was no movement. One moment I stood straight and still as a statue; in the sameinstant, he was in my arms.　　Warm—or at least, that was my perception. With the sweet, delicious scent that I'd never been able toreally take in with my dull human senses, but that was one hundred percent Edward. I pressed my faceinto his smooth chest.　　And then he shifted his weight uncomfortably. Leaned away from my embrace. I stared up at his face,confused and frightened by the rejection.　　"Urn... carefully, Bella. Ow."I yanked my arms away, folding them behind my back as soon as I understood.　　I was too strong.　　"Oops," I mouthed.　　He smiled the kind of smile that would have stopped my heart if it were still beating.　　"Don't panic, love," he said, lifting his hand to touch my lips, parted in horror. "You're just a bit strongerthan I am for the moment."My eyebrows pushed together. I'd known this, too, but it felt more surreal than any other part of thisultimately surreal moment. I was stronger than Edward. I'd made him say ow.　　His hand stroked my cheek again, and I all but forgot my distress as another wave of desire rippledthrough my motionless body.　　These emotions were so much stronger than I was used to that it was hard to stick to one train ofthought despite the extra room in my head. Each new sensation overwhelmed me. I remembered Edwardsaying once—his voice in my head a weak shadow compared to the crystal, musical clarity I was hearingnow—that his kind, our kind, were easily distracted. I could see why.　　I made a concerted effort to focus. There was something I needed to say. The most important thing.　　Very carefully, so carefully that the movement was actually discernible, I brought my right arm out frombehind my back and raised my hand to touch his cheek. I refused to let myself be sidetracked by thepearly color of my hand or by the smooth silk of his skin or by the charge that zinged in my fingertips.　　I stared into his eyes and heard my own voice for the first time.　　"I love you," I said, but it sounded like singing. My voice rang and shimmered like a bell.　　His answering smile dazzled me more than it ever had when I was human; I could really see it now.　　"As I love you," he told me.　　He took my face between his hands and leaned his face to mine—slow enough to remind me to becareful. Hekissed me, soft as a whisper at first, and then suddenly stronger, fiercer. I tried to remember to be gentlewith him, but it was hard work to remember anything in the onslaught of sensation, hard to hold on to anycoherent thoughts.　　It was like he'd never kissed me—like this was our first kiss. And, in truth, he'd never kissed me thisway before.　　It almost made me feel guilty. Surely I was in breach of the contract. I couldn't be allowed to have this,too.　　Though I didn't need oxygen, my breathing sped, raced as fast as it had when I was burning. This was adifferent kind of fire.　　Someone cleared his throat. Emmett. I recognized the deep sound at once, joking and annoyed at thesame time.　　I'd forgotten we weren't alone. And then I realized that the way I was curved around Edward now wasnot exactly polite for company.　　Embarrassed, I half-stepped away in another instantaneous movement.　　Edward chuckled and stepped with me, keeping his arms tight around my waist. His face was glowing—like a white flame burned from behind his diamond skin.　　I took an unnecessary breath to settle myself.　　How different this kissing was! I read his expression as I compared the indistinct human memories to thisclear, intense feeling. He looked... a little smug.　　"You've been holding out on me," I accused in my singing voice, my eyes narrowing a tiny bit.　　He laughed, radiant with relief that it was all over—the fear, the pain, the uncertainties, the waiting, all ofit behind us now. "It was sort of necessary at the time," he reminded me. "Now it's your turn to not breakme." He laughed again.　　I frowned as I considered that, and then Edward was not the only one laughing.　　Carlisle stepped around Emmett and walked toward me swiftly; his eyes were only slightly wary, butJasper shadowed his footsteps. I'd never seen Carlisle's face before either, not really. I had an odd urgeto blink—like I was staring at the sun.　　"How do you feel, Bella?" Carlisle asked.　　I considered that for a sixty-fourth of a second.　　"Overwhelmed. There's so much. ..." I trailed off, listening to the bell-tone of my voice again.　　"Yes, it can be quite confusing."I nodded one fast, jerky bob. "But I feel like me. Sort of. I didn't expect that."Edward's arms squeezed lightly around my waist. "I told you so," he whispered.　　"You are quite controlled," Carlisle mused. "More so than / expected, even with the time you had toprepare yourself mentally for this."I thought about the wild mood swings, the difficulty concentrating, and whispered, "I'm not sure aboutthat."He nodded seriously, and then his jeweled eyes glittered with interest. "It seems like we did somethingright with the morphine this time. Tell me, what do you remember of the transformation process?"I hesitated, intensely aware of Edward's breath brushing against my cheek, sending whispers ofelectricity through my skin.　　"Everything was... very dim before. I remember the baby couldn't breathe___"I looked at Edward, momentarily frightened by the memory.　　"Renesmee is healthy and well," he promised, a gleam I'd never seen before in his eyes. He said hername with an understated fervor. A reverence. The way devout people talked about their gods. "Whatdo you remember after that?"I focused on my poker face. I'd never been much of a liar. "It's hard to remember. It was so darkbefore. And then... I opened my eyes and I could see everything""Amazing," Carlisle breathed, his eyes alight.　　Chagrin washed through me, and I waited for the heat to burn in my cheeks and give me away. And thenI remembered that I would never blush again. Maybe that would protect Edward from the truth.　　I'd have to find a way to tip off Carlisle, though. Someday. If he ever needed to create another vampire.　　That possibility seemed very unlikely, which made me feel better about lying.　　"I want you to think—to tell me everything you remember," Carlisle pressed excitedly, and I couldn'thelp the grimace that flashed across my face. I didn't want to have to keep lying, because I might slip up.　　And I didn't want to think about the burning. Unlike the human memories, that part was perfectly clearand I found I could remember it with far too much precision.　　"Oh, I'm so sorry, Bella," Carlisle apologized immediately. "Of course your thirst must be veryuncomfortable. This conversation can wait."Until he'd mentioned it, the thirst actually wasn't unmanageable. There was so much room in my head. Aseparate part of my brain was keeping tabs on the burn in my throat, almost like a reflex. The way my oldbrain had handled breathing and blinking.　　But Carlisle's assumption brought the burn to the forefront of my mind. Suddenly, the dry ache was all Icould think about, and the more I thought about it, the more it hurt. My hand flew up to cup my throat,like I could smother the flames from the outside. The skin of my neck was strange beneath my fingers. Sosmooth it was somehow soft, though it was hard as stone, too.　　Edward dropped his arms and took my other hand, tugging gently. "Let's hunt, Bella."My eyes opened wider and the pain of the thirst receded, shock taking its place.　　Me? Hunt? With Edward? But... how? I didn't know what to do.　　He read the alarm in my expression and smiled encouragingly. "It's quite easy, love. Instinctual. Don'tworry, I'll show you." When I didn't move, he grinned his crooked smile and raised his eyebrows. "I wasunder the impression that you'd always wanted to see me hunt."I laughed in a short burst of humor (part of me listened in wonder to the pealing bell sound) as his wordsreminded me of cloudy human conversations. And then I took a whole second to run quickly throughthose first dayswith Edward—the true beginning of my life—in my head so that I would never forget them. I did notexpect that it would be so uncomfortable to remember. Like trying to squint through muddy water. Iknew from Rosalie's experience that if I thought of my human memories enough, I would not lose themover time. I did not want to forget one minute I'd spent with Edward, even now, when eternity stretchedin front of us. i would have to make sure those human memories were cemented into my infallible vampiremind.　　"Shall we?" Edward asked. He reached up to take the hand that was still at my neck. His fingerssmoothed down the column of my throat. "I don't want you to be hurting," he added in a low murmur.　　Something I would not have been able to hear before.　　Tm fine," I said out of lingering human habit. "Wait. First."There was so much. I'd never gotten to my questions. There were more important things than the ache.　　It was Carlisle who spoke now. "Yes?""I want to see her. Renesmee."It was oddly difficult to say her name. My daughter, these words were even harder to think. It allseemed so distant. I tried to remember how I had felt three days ago, and automatically, my hands pulledfree of Edward's and dropped to my stomach.　　Flat. Empty. I clutched at the pale silk that covered my skin, panicking again, while an insignificant partof my mind noted that Alice must have dressed me.　　I knew there was nothing left inside me, and I faintly remembered the bloody removal scene, but thephysical proof was still hard to process. All I knew was loving my little nudger inside of me. Outside ofme, she seemed like something I must have imagined. A fading dream—a dream that was half nightmare.　　While I wrestled with my confusion, I saw Edward and Carlisle exchange a guarded glance.　　"What?" I demanded.　　"Bella," Edward said soothingly. "That's not really a good idea. She's half human, love. Her heart beats,and blood runs in her veins. Until your thirst is positively under control... You don't want to put her indanger, do you?"I frowned. Of course I must not want that.　　Was I out of control? Confused, yes. Easily unfocused, yes. But dangerous? To her? My daughter?　　I couldn't be positive that the answer was no. So I would have to be patient. That sounded difficult.　　Because until I saw her again, she wouldn't be real. Just a fading dream... of a stranger...　　"Where is she?" I listened hard, and then I could hear the beating heart on the floor below me. I couldhear more than one person breathing—quietly, like they were listening, too. There was also a flutteringsound, a thrumming, that I couldn't place___And the sound of the heartbeat was so moist and appealing, that my mouth started watering.　　So I would definitely have to learn how to hunt before I saw her. My stranger baby.　　"Is Rosalie with her?""Yes," Edward answered in a clipped tone, and I could see that something he'd thought of upset him. I'dthoughthe and Rose were over their differences. Had the animosity erupted again? Before I could ask, he pulledmy hands away from my flat stomach, tugging gently again.　　"Wait," I protested again, trying to focus. "What about Jacob? And Charlie? Tell me everything that Imissed. How long was I... unconscious?"Edward didn't seem to notice my hesitation over the last word. Instead, he was exchanging another waryglance with Carlisle.　　"What's wrong?" I whispered.　　"Nothing is wrong" Carlisle told me, emphasizing the last word in a strange way. "Nothing has changedmuch, actually—you were only unaware for just over two days. It was very fast, as these things go.　　Edward did an excellent job. Quite innovative—the venom injection straight to your heart was his idea."He paused to smile proudly at his son and then sighed. "Jacob is still here, and Charlie still believes thatyou are sick. He thinks you're in Atlanta right now, undergoing tests at the CDC. We gave him a badnumber, and he's frustrated. He's been speaking to Esme.""I should call him...," I murmured to myself, but, listening to my own voice, I understood the newdifficulties. He wouldn't recognize this voice. It wouldn't reassure him. And then the earlier surpriseintruded. "Hold on—Jacob is still here?"Another glance between them.　　"Bella," Edward said quickly. "There's much to discuss, but we should take care of you first. You haveto be in pain___"When he pointed that out, I remembered the burn in my throat and swallowed convulsively. "But Jacob—""We have all the time in the world for explanations, love," he reminded me gently.　　Of course. I could wait a little longer for the answer; it would be easier to listen when the fierce pain ofthe fiery thirst was no longer scattering my concentration. "Okay.""Wait, wait, wait," Alice trilled from the doorway. She danced across the room, dreamily graceful. Aswith Edward and Carlisle, I felt some shock as I really looked at her face for the first time. So lovely.　　"You promised I could be there the first time! What if you two run past something reflective?""Alice—," Edward protested.　　"It will only take a second!" And with that, Alice darted from the room.　　Edward sighed.　　"What is she talking about?"But Alice was already back, carrying the huge, gilt-framed mirror from Rosalie's room, which was nearlytwice as tall as she was, and several times as wide.　　Jasper had been so still and silent that I'd taken no notice of him since he'd followed behind Carlisle.　　Now he moved again, to hover over Alice, his eyes locked on my expression. Because I was the dangerhere.　　I knew he would be tasting the mood around me, too, and so he must have felt my jolt of shock as Istudied his face, looking at it closely for the first time.　　Through my sightless human eyes, the scars left from his former life with the newborn armies in the Southhad been mostly invisible. Only with a bright light to throw their slightly raised shapes into definition couldI even make out their existence.　　Now that I could see, the scars were Jasper's most dominant feature. It was hard to take my eyes off hisravaged neck and jaw—hard to believe that even a vampire could have survived so many sets of teethripping into his throat.　　Instinctively, I tensed to defend myself. Any vampire who saw Jasper would have had the same reaction.　　The scars were like a lighted billboard. Dangerous, they screamed. How many vampires had tried tokill Jasper? Hundreds? Thousands? The same number that had died in the attemptJasper both saw and felt my assessment, my caution, and he smiled wryly.　　"Edward gave me grief for not getting you to a mirror before the wedding," Alice said, pulling myattention away from her frightening lover. Tm not going to be chewed out again.""Chewed out?" Edward asked skeptically, one eyebrow curving upward.　　"Maybe I'm overstating things," she murmured absently as she turned the mirror to face me.　　"And maybe this has solely to do with your own voyeuristic gratification," he countered.　　Alice winked at him.　　I was only aware of this exchange with the lesser part of my concentration. The greater part was rivetedon the person in the mirror.　　My first reaction was an unthinking pleasure. The alien creature in the glass was indisputably beautiful,every bit as beautiful as Alice or Esme. She was fluid even in stillness, and her flawless face was pale asthe moon against the frame of her dark, heavy hair. Her limbs were smooth and strong, skin glisteningsubtly, luminous as a pearl.　　My second reaction was horror.　　Who was she? At first glance, I couldn't find my face anywhere in the smooth, perfect planes of herfeatures.　　And her eyes! Though I'd known to expect them, her eyes still sent a thrill of terror through me.　　All the while I studied and reacted, her face was perfectly composed, a carving of a goddess, showingnothing of the turmoil roiling inside me. And then her full lips moved.　　"The eyes?" I whispered, unwilling to say my eyes. "How long?　　"They'll darken up in a few months," Edward said in a soft, comforting voice. "Animal blood dilutes thecolor more quickly than a diet of human blood. They'll turn amber first, then gold."My eyes would blaze like vicious red flames for months?　　"Months?" My voice was higher now, stressed. In the mirror, the perfect eyebrows lifted incredulouslyabove her glowing crimson eyes—brighter than any I'd ever seen before.　　Jasper took a step forward, alarmed by the intensity of my sudden anxiety. He knew young vampiresonly too well; did this emotion presage some misstep on my part?　　No one answered my question. I looked away, to Edward and Alice. Both their eyes were slightlyunfocused—reacting to Jasper's unease. Listening to its cause, looking ahead to the immediate future.　　I took another deep, unnecessary breath.　　"No, I'm fine," I promised them. My eyes flickered to the stranger in the mirror and back. "It's just... alot to take in."Jasper's brow furrowed, highlighting the two scars over his left eye.　　"I don't know," Edward murmured.　　The woman in the mirror frowned. "What question did I miss?"Edward grinned. "Jasper wonders how you're doing it.""Doing what?""Controlling your emotions, Bella," Jasper answered. "I've never seen a newborn do that—stop anemotion in its tracks that way. You were upset, but when you saw our concern, you reined it in, regainedpower over yourself. I was prepared to help, but you didn't need it.""Is that wrong?" I asked. My body automatically froze as I waited for his verdict.　　"No," he said, but his voice was unsure.　　Edward stroked his hand down my arm, as if encouraging me to thaw. "It's very impressive, Bella, butwe don't understand it. We don't know how long it can hold."I considered that for a portion of a second. At any moment, would I snap? Turn into a monster?　　I couldn't feel it coming on.... Maybe there was no way to anticipate such a thing.　　"But what do you think?" Alice asked, a little impatient now, pointing to the mirror.　　"I'm not sure," I hedged, not wanting to admit how frightened I really was.　　I stared at the beautiful woman with the terrifying eyes, looking for pieces of me. There was somethingthere in the shape of her lips—if you looked past the dizzying beauty, it was true that her upper lip wasslightly out of balance, a bit too full to match the lower. Finding this familiar little flaw made me feel a tinybit better. Maybe the rest of me was in there, too.　　I raised my hand experimentally, and the woman in the mirror copied the movement, touching her face,too. Her crimson eyes watched me warily.　　Edward sighed.　　I turned away from her to look at him, raising one eyebrow.　　"Disappointed?" I asked, my ringing voice impassive.　　He laughed. "Yes," he admitted.　　I felt the shock break through the composed mask on my face, followed instantly by the hurt.　　Alice snarled. Jasper leaned forward again, waiting for me to snap.　　But Edward ignored them and wrapped his arms tightly around my newly frozen form, pressing his lipsagainst my cheek. "I was rather hoping that I'd be able to hear your mind, now that it is more similar tomy own," he murmured. "And here I am, as frustrated as ever, wondering what could possibly be goingon inside your head."I felt better at once.　　"Oh well," I said lightly, relieved that my thoughts were still my own. "I guess my brain will never workright. At least I'm pretty."It was becoming easier to joke with him as I adjusted, to think in straight lines. To be myself.　　Edward growled in my ear. "Bella, you have never been merely pretty."Then his face pulled away from mine, and he sighed. "All right, all right," he said to someone.　　"What?" I asked.　　"You're making Jasper more edgy by the second. He may relax a little when you've hunted."I looked at Jasper's worried expression and nodded. I didn't want to snap here, if that was coming.　　Better to be surrounded by trees than family.　　"Okay. Let's hunt," I agreed, a thrill of nerves and anticipation making my stomach quiver. I unwrappedEdward's arms from around me, keeping one of his hands, and turned my back on the strange andbeautiful woman in the mirror.
    Chapter 21 First Hunt
    "The window?" I asked, staring two stories down.　　I'd never really been afraid of heights per se, but being able to see all the details with such clarity madethe prospect less appealing. The angles of the rocks below were sharper than I would have imaginedthem.　　Edward smiled. "It's the most convenient exit. If you're frightened, I can carry you.""We have all eternity, and you're worried about the time it would take to walk to the back door?"He frowned slightly. "Renesmee and Jacob are downstairs___""Oh."Right. I was the monster now. I had to keep away from scents that might trigger my wild side. From thepeople that I loved in particular. Even the ones I didn't really know yet.　　"Is Renesmee... okay... with Jacob there?" I whispered. I realized belatedly that it must havebeenJacob's heart I'd heard below. I listened hard again, but I could only hear the one steady pulse. "Hedoesn't like her much."Edward's lips tightened in an odd way. "Trust me, she is perfectly safe. I know exactly what Jacob isthinking.""Of course," I murmured, and looked at the ground again.　　"Stalling?" he challenged.　　"A little. I don't know how...."And I was very conscious of my family behind me, watching silently. Mostly silently. Emmett had alreadychuckled under his breath once. One mistake, and he'd be rolling on the floor. Then the jokes about theworld's only clumsy vampire would start....　　Also, this dress—that Alice must have put me in sometime when I was too lost in the burning tonotice—was not what I would have picked out for either jumping or hunting. Tightly fitted ice-blue silk?　　What did she think I would need it for? Was there a cocktail party later?　　"Watch me," Edward said. And then, very casually, he stepped out of the tall, open window and fell.　　I watched carefully, analyzing the angle at which he bent his knees to absorb the impact. The sound ofhis landing was very low—a muted thud that could have been a door softly closed, or a book gently laidon a table.　　It didn't look hard.　　Clenching my teeth as I concentrated, I tried to copy his casual step into empty air.　　Ha! The ground seemed to move toward me so slowly that it was nothing at all to place my feet—whatshoes had Alice put me in? Stilettos? She'd lost her mind—to place mysilly shoes exactly right so thatlanding was no different than stepping one foot forward on a flat surface.　　I absorbed the impact in the balls of my feet, not wanting to snap off the thin heels. My landing seemedjust as quiet as his. I grinned at him.　　"Right. Easy."He smiled back. "Bella?""Yes?""That was quite graceful—even for a vampire."I considered that for a moment, and then I beamed. If he'd just been saying that, then Emmett wouldhave laughed. No one found his remark humorous, so it must have been true. It was the first time anyonehad ever applied the word graceful 'to me in my entire life... or, well, existence anyway.　　"T/?an/cyou,"i told him.　　And then I hooked the silver satin shoes off my feet one by one and lobbed them together back throughthe open window. A little too hard, maybe, but I heard someone catch them before they could damagethe paneling.　　Alice grumbled, "Her fashion sense hasn't improved as much as her balance."Edward took my hand—I couldn't stop marveling at the smoothness, the comfortable temperature of hisskin—and darted through the backyard to the edge of the river. I went along with him effortlessly.　　Everything physical seemed very simple.　　"Are we swimming?" I asked him when we stopped beside the water.　　"And ruin your pretty dress? No. We're jumping."I pursed my lips, considering. The river was about fifty yards wide here.　　"You first," I said.　　He touched my cheek, took two quick backward strides, and then ran back those two steps, launchinghimself from a flat stone firmly embedded in the riverbank. I studied the flash of movement as he arcedover the water, finally turning a somersault just before he disappeared into the thick trees on the otherside of the river.　　"Show-off," I muttered, and heard his invisible laugh.　　I backed up five paces, just in case, and took a deep breath.　　Suddenly, I was anxious again. Not about falling or getting hurt—I was more worried about the forestgetting hurt.　　It had come on slowly, but I could feel it now—the raw, massive strength thrilling in my limbs. I wassuddenly sure that if I wanted to tunnel under the river, to claw or beat my way straight through thebedrock, it wouldn't take me very long. The objects around me—the trees, the shrubs, the rocks... thehouse—had all begun to look very fragile.　　Hoping very much that Esme was not particularly fond of any specific trees across the river, I began myfirst stride. And then stopped when the tight satin split six inches up my thigh. Alice!　　Well, Alice always seemed to treat clothes as if they were disposable and meant for one-time usage, soshe shouldn't mind this. I bent to carefully grasp the hem at the undamaged right seam between my fingersand, exerting the tiniest amount of pressure possible, I ripped the dress open to the top of my thigh. ThenI fixed the other side to match.　　Much better.　　I could hear the muffled laughter in the house, and even the sound of someone gritting her teeth. Thelaughter came from upstairs and down, and I very easily recognized the much different, rough, throatychuckle from the firstfloor.　　So Jacob was watching, too? I couldn't imagine what he was thinking now, or what he was still doinghere. I'd envisioned our reunion—if he could ever forgive me—taking place far in the future, when I wasmore stable, and time had healed the wounds I'd inflicted in his heart.　　I didn't turn to look at him now, wary of my mood swings. It wouldn't be good to let any emotion taketoo strong a hold on my frame of mind. Jasper's fears had me on edge, too. I had to hunt before I dealtwith anything else. I tried to forget everything else so I could concentrate.　　"Bella?" Edward called from the woods, his voice moving closer. "Do you want to watch again?"But I remembered everything perfectly, of course, and I didn't want to give Emmett a reason to findmore humor in my education. This was physical—it should be instinctive. So I took a deep breath andran for the river.　　Unhindered by my skirt, it took only one long bound to reach the water's edge. Just an eighty-fourth of asecond, and yet it was plenty of time—my eyes and my mind moved so quickly that one step wasenough. It was simple to position my right foot just so against the flat stone and exert the adequatepressure to send my body wheeling up into the air. I was paying more attention to aim than force, and Ierred on the amount of power necessary—but at least I didn't err on the side that would have gotten mewet. The fifty yard width was slightly too easy a distance___It was a strange, giddy, electrifying thing, but a short thing. An entire second had yet to pass, and I wasacross.　　I was expecting the close-packed trees to be a problem, but they were surprisingly helpful. It was asimple matter to reach out with one sure hand as I fell back toward the earth again deep inside the forestand catch myself on a convenient branch; I swung lightly from the limb and landed on my toes, still fifteenfeet from the ground on the wide bough of a Sitka spruce.　　It was fabulous.　　Over the sound of my peals of delighted laughter, I could hear Edward racing to find me. My jump hadbeen twice as long as his. When he reached my tree, his eyes were wide. I leaped nimbly from thebranch to his side,soundlessly landing again on the balls of my feet.　　"Was that good?" I wondered, my breathing accelerated with excitement.　　"Very good." He smiled approvingly, but his casual tone didn't match the surprised expression in hiseyes.　　"Can we do it again?""Focus, Bella—we're on a hunting trip.""Oh, right." I nodded. "Hunting.""Follow me... if you can." He grinned, his expression suddenly taunting, and broke into a run.　　He was faster than me. I couldn't imagine how he moved his legs with such blinding speed, but it wasbeyond me. However, I was stronger, and every stride of mine matched the length of three of his. Andso I flew with him through the living green web, by his side, not following at all. As I ran, I couldn't helplaughing quietly at the thrill of it; the laughter neither slowed me nor upset my focus.　　I could finally understand why Edward never hit the trees when he ran—a question that had always beena mystery to me. It was a peculiar sensation, the balance between the speed and the clarity. For, while Irocketed over, under, and through the thick jade maze at a rate that should have reduced everythingaround me to a streaky green blur, I could plainly see each tiny leaf on all the small branches of everyinsignificant shrub that I passed.　　The wind of my speed blew my hair and my torn dress out behind me, and, though I knew it shouldn't, itfelt warm against my skin. Just as the rough forest floor shouldn't feel like velvet beneath my bare soles,and the limbs that whipped against my skin shouldn't feel like caressing feathers.　　The forest was much more alive than I'd ever known—small creatures whose existence I'd neverguessed at teemed in the leaves around me. They all grew silent after we passed, their breath quickeningin fear. The animals had a much wiser reaction to our scent than humans seemed to. Certainly, it'd hadthe opposite effect on me.　　I kept waiting to feel winded, but my breath came effortlessly. I waited for the burn to begin in mymuscles, but my strength only seemed to increase as I grew accustomed to my stride. My leaping boundsstretched longer, and soon he was trying to keep up with me. I laughed again, exultant, when I heard himfalling behind. My naked feet touched the ground so infrequently now it felt more like flying than running.　　"Belial he called dryly, his voice even, lazy. I could hear nothing else; he had stopped.　　I briefly considered mutiny.　　But, with a sigh, I whirled and skipped lightly to his side, some hundred yards back. I looked at himexpectantly. He was smiling, with one eyebrow raised. He was so beautiful that I could only stare.　　"Did you want to stay in the country?" he asked, amused. "Or were you planning to continue on toCanada this afternoon?""This is fine," I agreed, concentrating less on what he was saying and more on the mesmerizing way hislips moved when he spoke. It was hard not to become sidetracked with everything fresh in my strongnew eyes. "What are we hunting?""Elk. I thought something easy for your first time ..." He trailed off when my eyes narrowed at the wordeasy.　　But I wasn't going to argue; I was too thirsty. As soon as I'd started to think about the dry burn in mythroat, it was all I could think about. Definitely getting worse. My mouth felt like four o'clock on a Juneafternoon in Death Valley.　　"Where?" I asked, scanning the trees impatiently. Now that I had given the thirst my attention, it seemedto taint every other thought in my head, leaking into the more pleasant thoughts of running and Edward'slips and kissing and... scorching thirst. I couldn't get away from it.　　"Hold still for a minute," he said, putting his hands lightly on my shoulders. The urgency of my thirstreceded momentarily at his touch.　　"Now close your eyes," he murmured. When I obeyed, he raised his hands to my face, stroking mycheekbones. I felt my breathing speed and waited briefly again for the blush that wouldn't come.　　"Listen," Edward instructed. "What do you hear?"Everything,I could have said; his perfect voice, his breath, his lips brushing together as he spoke, thewhisper of birds preening their feathers in the treetops, their fluttering heartbeats, the maple leavesscraping together, the faint clicking of ants following each other in a long line up the bark of the nearesttree. But I knew he meant something specific, so I let my ears range outward, seeking something differentthan the small hum of life that surrounded me. There was an open space near us—the wind had adifferent sound across the exposed grass—and a small creek, with a rocky bed. And there, near thenoise of the water, was the splash of lapping tongues, the loud thudding of heavy hearts, pumping thickstreams of blood___It felt like the sides of my throat had sucked closed.　　"By the creek, to the northeast?" I asked, my eyes still shut.　　"Yes." His tone was approving. "Now... wait for the breeze again and... what do you smell?"Mostly him—his strange honey-lilac-and-sun perfume. But also the rich, earthy smell of rot and moss,the resin in the evergreens, the warm, almost nutty aroma of the small rodents cowering beneath the treeroots. And then, reaching out again, the clean smell of the water, which was surprisingly unappealingdespite my thirst. I focused toward the water and found the scent that must have gone with the lappingnoise and the pounding heart. Another warm smell, rich and tangy, stronger than the others. And yetnearly as unappealing as the brook. I wrinkled my nose.　　He chuckled. "I know—it takes some getting used to.""Three?" I guessed.　　"Five. There are two more in the trees behind them.""What do I do now?"His voice sounded like he was smiling. "What do you feel like doing?"I thought about that, my eyes still shut as I listened and breathed in the scent. Another bout of bakingthirst intruded on my awareness, and suddenly the warm, tangy odor wasn't quite so objectionable. Atleast it would be something hot and wet in my desiccated mouth. My eyes snapped open.　　"Don't think about it," he suggested as he lifted his hands off my face and took a step back. "Just followyourinstincts."I let myself drift with the scent, barely aware of my movement as I ghosted down the incline to thenarrow meadow where the stream flowed. My body shifted forward automatically into a low crouch as Ihesitated at the fern-fringed edge of the trees. I could see a big buck, two dozen antler points crowninghis head, at the stream's edge, and the shadow-spotted shapes of the four others heading eastward intoforest at a leisurely pace.　　I centered myself around the scent of the male, the hot spot in his shaggy neck where the warmth pulsedstrongest. Only thirty yards—two or three bounds—between us. i tensed myself for the first leap.　　But as my muscles bunched in preparation, the wind shifted, blowing stronger now, and from the south. Ididn't stop to think, hurtling out of the trees in a path perpendicular to my original plan, scaring the elkinto the forest, racing after a new fragrance so attractive that there wasn't a choice. It was compulsory.　　The scent ruled completely. I was single-minded as I traced it, aware only of the thirst and the smell thatpromised to quench it. The thirst got worse, so painful now that it confused all my other thoughts andbegan to remind me of the burn of venom in my veins.　　There was only one thing that had any chance of penetrating my focus now, an instinct more powerful,more basic than the need to quench the fire—it was the instinct to protect myself from danger.　　Self-preservation.　　I was suddenly alert to the fact that I was being followed. The pull of the irresistible scent warred withthe impulse to turn and defend my hunt. A bubble of sound built in my chest, my lips pulled back of theirown accord to expose my teeth in warning. My feet slowed, the need to protect my back strugglingagainst the desire to quench my thirst.　　And then I could hear my pursuer gaining, and defense won. As I spun, the rising sound ripped its wayup my throat and out.　　The feral snarl, coming from my own mouth, was so unexpected that it brought me up short. It unsettledme, and it cleared my head for a second—the thirst-driven haze receded, though the thirst burned on.　　The wind shifted, blowing the smell of wet earth and coming rain across my face, further freeing me fromthe other scent's fiery grip—a scent so delicious it could only be human.　　Edward hesitated a few feet away, his arms raised as if to embrace me—or restrain me. His face wasintent and cautious as I froze, horrified.　　I realized that I had been about to attack him. With a hard jerk, I straightened out of my defensivecrouch. I held my breath as I refocused, fearing the power of the fragrance swirling up from the south.　　He could see reason return to my face, and he took a step toward me, lowering his arms.　　"I have to get away from here," I spit through my teeth, using the breath I had.　　Shock crossed his face. "Can you leave?"I didn't have time to ask him what he meant by that. I knew the ability to think clearly would last only aslong as I could stop myself from thinking of—I burst into a run again, a flat-out sprint straight north, concentrating solely on the uncomfortable feelingof sensory deprivation that seemed to be my body's only response to the lack of air. My one goal was torun farenough away that the scent behind me would be completely lost. Impossible to find, even if I changedmy mind...　　Once again, I was aware of being followed, but I was sane this time. I fought the instinct to breathe—touse the flavors in the air to be sure it was Edward. I didn't have to fight long; though I was running fasterthan I ever had before, shooting like a comet through the straightest path I could find in the trees; Edwardcaught up with me after a short minute.　　A new thought occurred to me, and I stopped dead, my feet planted. I was sure it must be safe here, butI held my breath just in case.　　Edward blew past me, surprised by my sudden freeze. He wheeled around and was at my side in asecond. He put his hands on my shoulders and stared into my eyes, shock still the dominant emotion onhis face.　　"How did you do that?" he demanded.　　"You let me beat you before, didn't you?" I demanded back, ignoring his question. And I'd thought I'dbeen doing sowell!　　When I opened my mouth, I could taste the air—it was unpolluted now, with no trace of the compellingperfume to torment my thirst. I took a cautious breath.　　He shrugged and shook his head, refusing to be deflected. "Bella, how did you do it?""Run away? I held my breath.""But how did you stop hunting?""When you came up behind me... I'm so sorry about that.""Why are you apologizing to me? I'm the one who was horribly careless. I assumed no one would be sofar from the trails, but I should have checked first. Such a stupid mistake! You have nothing to apologizefor.""But I growled at you!" I was still horrified that I was physically capable of such blasphemy.　　"Of course you did. That's only natural. But I can't understand how you ran away.""What else could I do?" I asked. His attitude confused me—what did he want to have happened? "Itmight have been someone I know!"He startled me, suddenly bursting into a spasm of loud laughter, throwing his head back and letting thesound echo off the trees.　　"Why are you laughing at me?"He stopped at once, and I could see he was wary again.　　Keep it under control,I thought to myself. I had to watch my temper. Just like I was a young werewolfrather than a vampire.　　"I'm not laughing at you,Bella. I'm laughing because I am in shock. And I am in shock because I amcompletely amazed.""Why?""You shouldn't be able to do any of this. You shouldn't be so... so rational. You shouldn't be able tostand here discussing this with me calmly and coolly. And, much more than any of that, you should nothave been able to breakoff mid-hunt with the scent of human blood in the air. Even mature vampires have difficulty with that—we're always very careful of where we hunt so as not to put ourselves in the path of temptation. Bella,you're behaving like you're decades rather than days old.""Oh." But I'd known it was going to be hard. That was why I'd been so on guard. I'd been expecting itto be difficult.　　He put his hands on my face again, and his eyes were full of wonder. "What wouldn't I give to be able tosee into your mind for just this one moment."Such powerful emotions. I'd been prepared for the thirst part, but not this. I'd been so sure it wouldn'tbe the same when he touched me. Well, truthfully, it wasn't the same.　　It was stronger.　　I reached up to trace the planes of his face; my fingers lingered on his lips.　　"I thought I wouldn't feel this way for a long time?" My uncertainty made the words a question. "But Istillwant you."He blinked in shock. "How can you even concentrate on that? Aren't you unbearably thirsty?"Of course I was now, now that he'd brought it up again!　　I tried to swallow and then sighed, closing my eyes like I had before to help me concentrate. I let mysenses range out around me, tensed this time in case of another onslaught of the delicious taboo scent.　　Edward dropped his hands, not even breathing while I listened farther and farther out into the web ofgreen life, sifting through the scents and sounds for something not totally repellant to my thirst. There wasa hint of something different, a faint trail to the east___My eyes flashed open, but my focus was still on sharper senses as I turned and darted silently eastward.　　The ground sloped steeply upward almost at once, and I ran in a hunting crouch, close to the ground,taking to the trees when that was easier. I sensed rather than heard Edward with me, flowing quietlythrough the woods, letting me lead.　　The vegetation thinned as we climbed higher; the scent of pitch and resin grew more powerful, as did thetrail I followed—it was a warm scent, sharper than the smell of the elk and more appealing. A fewseconds more and I could hear the muted padding of immense feet, so much subtler than the crunch ofhooves. The sound was up—in the branches rather than on the ground. Automatically I darted into theboughs as well, gaining the strategic higher position, halfway up a towering silver fir.　　The soft thud of paws continued stealthily beneath me now; the rich scent was very close. My eyespinpointed the movement linked with the sound, and I saw the tawny hide of the great cat slinking alongthe wide branch of a spruce just down and to the left of my perch. He was big—easily four times mymass. His eyes were intent on the ground beneath; the cat hunted, too. I caught the smell of somethingsmaller, bland next to the aroma of my prey, cowering in brush below the tree. The lion's tail twitchedspasmodically as he prepared to spring.　　With a light bound, I sailed through the air and landed on the lion's branch. He felt the shiver of the woodand whirled, shrieking surprise and defiance. He clawed the space between us, his eyes bright with fury.　　Half-crazed withthirst, I ignored the exposed fangs and the hooked claws and launched myself at him, knocking us bothto the forest floor.　　It wasn't much of a fight.　　His raking claws could have been caressing fingers for all the impact they had on my skin. His teethcould find no purchase against my shoulder or my throat. His weight was nothing. My teeth unerringlysought his throat, and his instinctive resistance was pitifully feeble against my strength. My jaws lockedeasily over the precise point where the heat flow concentrated.　　It was effortless as biting into butter. My teeth were steel razors; they cut through the fur and fat andsinews like they weren't there.　　The flavor was wrong, but the blood was hot and wet and it soothed the ragged, itching thirst as I drankin an eager rush. The cat's struggles grew more and more feeble, and his screams choked off with agurgle. The warmth of the blood radiated throughout my whole body, heating even my fingertips andtoes.　　The lion was finished before I was. The thirst flared again when he ran dry, and I shoved his carcass offmy body in disgust. How could I still be thirsty after all that?　　I wrenched myself erect in one quick move. Standing, I realized I was a bit of a mess. I wiped my faceoff on the back of my arm and tried to fix the dress. The claws that had been so ineffectual against myskin had had more success with the thin satin.　　"Hmm," Edward said. I looked up to see him leaning casually against a tree trunk, watching me with athoughtful look on his face.　　"I guess I could have done that better." I was covered in dirt, my hair knotted, my dress bloodstainedand hanging in tatters. Edward didn't come home from hunting trips looking like this.　　"You did perfectly fine," he assured me. "It's just that... it was much more difficult for me to watch than itshould have been."I raised my eyebrows, confused.　　"It goes against the grain," he explained, "letting you wrestle with lions. I was having an anxiety attack thewhole time.""Silly.""I know. Old habits die hard. I like the improvements to your dress, though."If I could have blushed, I would have. I changed the subject. "Why am I still thirsty?""Because you're young."I sighed. "And I don't suppose there are any other mountain lions nearby.""Plenty of deer, though."I made a face. "They don't smell as good.""Herbivores. The meat-eaters smell more like humans," he explained.　　"Not that much like humans," I disagreed, trying not to remember.　　"We could go back," he said solemnly, but there was a teasing light in his eye. "Whoever it was outthere, if they were men, they probably wouldn't even mind death if you were the one delivering it." Hisgaze ran over my ravaged dress again. "In fact, they would think they were already dead and gone toheaven the moment they saw you."I rolled my eyes and snorted. "Let's go hunt some stinking herbivores."We found a large herd of mule deer as we ran back toward home. He hunted with me this time, nowthat I'd gotten the hang of it. I brought down a large buck, making nearly as much of a mess as I had withthe lion. He'd finished with two before I was done with the first, not a hair ruffled, not a spot on his whiteshirt. We chased the scattered and terrified herd, but instead of feeding again, this time I watchedcarefully to see how he was able to hunt so neatly.　　All the times that I had wished that Edward would not have to leave me behind when he hunted, I hadsecretly been just a little relieved. Because I was sure that seeing this would be frightening. Horrifying.　　That seeing him hunt would finally make him look like a vampire to me.　　Of course, it was much different from this perspective, as a vampire myself. But I doubted that even myhuman eyes would have missed the beauty here.　　It was a surprisingly sensual experience to observe Edward hunting. His smooth spring was like thesinuous strike of a snake; his hands were so sure, so strong, so completely inescapable; his full lips wereperfect as they parted gracefully over his gleaming teeth. He was glorious. I felt a sudden jolt of bothpride and desire. He was mine. Nothing could ever separate him from me now. I was too strong to betorn from his side.　　He was very quick. He turned to me and gazed curiously at my gloating expression.　　"No longer thirsty?" he asked.　　I shrugged. "You distracted me. You're much better at it than I am.""Centuries of practice." He smiled. His eyes were a disconcertingly lovely shade of honey gold now.　　"Just one," I corrected him.　　He laughed. "Are you done for today? Or did you want to continue?""Done, I think." I felt very full, sort of sloshy, even. I wasn't sure how much more liquid would fit into mybody. But the burn in my throat was only muted. Then again, I'd known that thirst was just aninescapable part of this life.　　And worth it.　　I felt in control. Perhaps my sense of security was false, but I did feel pretty good about not killinganyone today. If I could resist totally human strangers, wouldn't I be able to handle the werewolf and ahalf-vampire child that I loved?　　"I want to see Renesmee," I said. Now that my thirst was tamed (if nothing close to erased), my earlierworries were hard to forget. I wanted to reconcile the stranger who was my daughter with the creatureI'd loved three days ago. It was so odd, so wrong not to have her inside me still. Abruptly, I felt emptyand uneasy.　　He held out his hand to me. I took it, and his skin felt warmer than before. His cheek was faintly flushed,the shadows under his eyes all but vanished.　　I was unable to resist stroking his face again. And again.　　I sort of forgot that I was waiting for a response to my request as I stared into his shimmering gold eyes.　　It was almost as hard as it had been to turn away from the scent of human blood, but I somehow keptthe need to be careful firmly in my head as I stretched up on my toes and wrapped my arms around him.　　Gently.　　He was not so hesitant in his movements; his arms locked around my waist and pulled me tight againsthis body. His lips crushed down on mine, but they felt soft. My lips no longer shaped themselves aroundhis; they held their own.　　Like before, it was as if the touch of his skin, his lips, his hands, was sinking right through my smooth,hard skin and into my new bones. To the very core of my body. I hadn't imagined that I could love himmore than I had.　　My old mind hadn't been capable of holding this much love. My old heart had not been strong enough tobear it.　　Maybe this was the part of me that I'd brought forward to be intensified in my new life. Like Carlisle'scompassion and Esme's devotion. I would probably never be able to do anything interesting or speciallike Edward, Alice, and Jasper could do. Maybe I would just love Edward more than anyone in thehistory of the world had ever loved anyone else.　　I could live with that.　　I remembered parts of this—twisting my fingers in his hair, tracing the planes of his chest—but otherparts were so new. He was new. It was an entirely different experience with Edward kissing me sofearlessly, so forcefully. I responded to his intensity, and then suddenly we were falling.　　"Oops," I said, and he laughed underneath me. "I didn't mean to tackle you like that. Are you okay?"He stroked my face. "Slightly better than okay" And then a perplexed expression crossed his face.　　"Renesmee?" he asked uncertainly, trying to ascertain what I wanted most in this moment. A very difficultquestion to answer, because I wanted so many things at the same time.　　I could tell that he wasn't exactly averse to procrastinating our return trip, and it was hard to think aboutmuch besides his skin on mine—there really wasn't that much left of the dress. But my memory ofRenesmee, before and after her birth, was becoming more and more dreamlike to me. More unlikely. Allmy memories of her were human memories; an aura of artificiality clung to them. Nothing seemed realthat I hadn't seen with these eyes, touched with these hands.　　Every minute, the reality of that little stranger slipped further away.　　"Renesmee," I agreed, rueful, and I whipped back up onto my feet, pulling him with me.
    Chapter 22 Promised
    Thinking of Renesmee brought her to that center-stage place in my strange, new, and roomy butdistractible mind. So many questions.　　"Tell me about her," i insisted as he took my hand. Being linked barely slowed us.　　"She's like nothing else in the world," he told me, and the sound of an almost religious devotion was thereagain in his voice.　　I felt a sharp pang of jealousy over this stranger. He knew her and I did not. It wasn't fair.　　"How much is she like you? How much like me? Or like I was, anyway.""It seems a fairly even divide.""She was warm-blooded," I remembered.　　"Yes. She has a heartbeat, though it runs a little bit faster than a human's. Her temperature is a little bithotter than usual, too. She sleeps.""Really?""Quite well for a newborn. The only parents in the world who don't need sleep, and our child alreadysleeps through the night." He chuckled.　　I liked the way he said our child. The words made her more real.　　"She has exactly your color eyes—so that didn't get lost, after all." He smiled at me. "They're sobeautiful.""And the vampire parts?" I asked.　　"Her skin seems about as impenetrable as ours. Not that anyone would dream of testing that."I blinked at him, a little shocked.　　"Of course no one would," he assured me again. "Her diet... well, she prefers to drink blood. Carlislecontinues to try to persuade her to drink some baby formula, too, but she doesn't have much patiencewith it. Can't say that Iblame her—nasty-smelling stuff, even for human food."I gaped openly at him now. He made it sound like they were having conversations. "Persuade her?""She's intelligent, shockingly so, and progressing at an immense pace. Though she doesn't speak—yet—she communicates quite effectively.""Doesn't. Speak. Yet"He slowed our pace further, letting me absorb this.　　"What do you mean, she communicates effectively?" I demanded.　　"I think it will be easier for you to... see for yourself. It's rather difficult to describe."I considered that. I knew there was a lot that I needed to see for myself before it would be real. I wasn'tsure how much more I was ready for, so I changed the subject.　　"Why is Jacob still here?" I asked. "How can he stand it? Why should he?" My ringing voice trembled alittle. "Why should he have to suffer more?""Jacob isn't suffering," he said in a strange new tone. "Though I might be willing to change his condition,"Edward added through his teeth.　　"Edward!" I hissed, yanking him to a stop (and feeling a little thrill of smugness that I was able to do it).　　"How can you say that? Jacob has given up everything to protect us! What I've put him through—!" Icringed at the dim memory of shame and guilt. It seemed odd now that I had needed him so much then.　　That sense of absence without him near had vanished; it must have been a human weakness.　　"You'll see exactly how I can say that," Edward muttered. "I promised him that I would let him explain,but I doubt you'll see it much differently than I do. Of course, I'm often wrong about your thoughts, aren'tI?" He pursed his lips and eyed me.　　"Explain what?"Edward shook his head. "I promised. Though I don't know if I really owe him anything at all anymore. . .　　." His teeth ground together.　　"Edward, I don't understand." Frustration and indignation took over my head.　　He stroked my cheek and then smiled gently when my face smoothed out in response, desiremomentarily overruling annoyance. "It's harder than you make it look, I know. I remember.""I don't like feeling confused.""I know. And so let's get you home, so that you can see it all for yourself." His eyes ran over the remainsof my dress as he spoke of going home, and he frowned. "Hmm." After a half second of thought, heunbuttoned his white shirt and held it out for me to put my arms through.　　"That bad?"He grinned.　　I slipped my arms into his sleeves and then buttoned it swiftly over my ragged bodice. Of course, thatleft him without a shirt, and it was impossible not to find that distracting.　　'Til race you," I said, and then cautioned, "no throwing the game this time!"He dropped my hand and grinned. "On your mark ..."Finding my way to my new home was simpler than walking down Charlie's street to my old one. Ourscent left a clear and easy trail to follow, even running as fast as I could.　　Edward had me beat till we hit the river. I took a chance and made my leap early, trying to use my extrastrength to win.　　"Ha!" I exulted when I heard my feet touch the grass first.　　Listening for his landing, I heard something I did not expect. Something loud and much too close. Athudding heart.　　Edward was beside me in the same second, his hands clamped down hard on the tops of my arms.　　"Don't breathe," he cautioned me urgently.　　I tried not to panic as I froze mid-breath. My eyes were the only things that moved, wheeling instinctivelyto find the source of the sound.　　Jacob stood at the line where the forest touched the Cullens' lawn, his arms folded across his body, hisjaw clenched tight. Invisible in the woods behind him, I heard now two larger hearts, and the faint crushof bracken under huge, pacing paws.　　"Carefully, Jacob," Edward said. A snarl from the forest echoed the concern in his voice. "Maybe thisisn't the best way—""You think it would be better to let her near the baby first?" Jacob interrupted. "It's safer to see howBella does with me. I heal fast."This was a test? To see if I could not kill Jacob before I tried to not kill Renesmee? I felt sick in thestrangest way—it had nothing to do with my stomach, only my mind. Was this Edward's idea?　　I glanced at his face anxiously; Edward seemed to deliberate for a moment, and then his expressiontwisted from concern into something else. He shrugged, and there was an undercurrent of hostility in hisvoice when he said, "It's your neck, I guess."The growl from the forest was furious this time; Leah, I had no doubt.　　What was with Edward? After all that we'd been through, shouldn't he have been able to feel somekindness for my best friend? I'd thought—maybe foolishly—that Edward was sort of Jacob's friend now,too. I must have misread them.　　But what was Jacob doing? Why would he offer himself as a test to protect Renesmee?　　It didn't make any sense to me. Even if our friendship had survived...　　And as my eyes met Jacob's now, I thought that maybe it had. He still looked like my best friend. But hewasn't the one who had changed. What did I look like to him?　　Then he smiled his familiar smile, the smile of a kindred spirit, and I was sure our friendship was intact. Itwas just like before, when we were hanging out in his homemade garage, just two friends killing time.　　Easy and normal.　　Again, I noticed that the strange need I'd felt for him before I'd changed was completely gone. He wasjust my friend, the way it was supposed to be.　　It still made no sense what he was doing now, though. Was he really so selfless that he would try toprotect me—with his own life—from doing something in an uncontrolled split second that I would regretin agony forever? That went way beyond simply tolerating what I had become, or miraculously managingto stay my friend. Jacob was one of the best people I knew, but this seemed like too much to acceptfrom anyone.　　His grin widened, and he shuddered slightly. "I gotta say it, Bells. You're a freak show."I grinned back, falling easily into the old pattern. This was a side of him I understood.　　Edward growled. "Watch yourself, mongrel."The wind blew from behind me and I quickly filled my lungs with the safe air so I could speak. "No, he'sright. The eyes are really something, aren't they?""Super-creepy. But it's not as bad as I thought it would be.""Gee—thanks for the amazing compliment!"He rolled his eyes. "You know what I mean. You still look like you—sort of. Maybe it's not the look somuch as... you are Bella. I didn't think it would feel like you were still here." He smiled at me againwithout a trace of bitterness or resentment anywhere in his face. Then he chuckled and said, "Anyway, Iguess I'll get used to the eyes soon enough.""You will?" I asked, confused. It was wonderful that we were still friends, but it wasn't like we'd bespending much time together.　　The strangest look crossed his face, erasing the smile. It was almost... guilty? Then his eyes shifted toEdward.　　"Thanks," he said. "I didn't know if you'd be able to keep it from her, promise or not. Usually, you justgive her everything she wants.""Maybe I'm hoping she'll get irritated and rip your head off," Edward suggested.　　Jacob snorted.　　"What's going on? Are you two keeping secrets from me?" I demanded, incredulous.　　"I'll explain later," Jacob said self-consciously—like he didn't really plan on it. Then he changed thesubject. "First, let's get this show on the road." His grin was a challenge now as he started slowlyforward.　　There was a whine of protest behind him, and then Leah's gray body slid out of the trees behind him.　　The taller, sandy-colored Seth was right behind her.　　"Cool it, guys," Jacob said. "Stay out of this."I was glad they didn't listen to him but only followed after him a little more slowly.　　The wind was still now; it wouldn't blow his scent away from me.　　He got close enough that I could feel the heat of his body in the air between us. My throat burned inresponse.　　"C'mon, Bells. Do your worst."Leah hissed.　　I didn't want to breathe. It wasn't right to take such dangerous advantage of Jacob, no matter if he wasthe one offering. But I couldn't get away from the logic. How else could I be sure that I wouldn't hurtRenesmee?　　Tm getting older here, Bella," Jacob taunted. "Okay, not technically, but you get the idea. Go on, take awhiff.""Hold on to me," I said to Edward, cringing back into his chest.　　His hands tightened on my arms.　　I locked my muscles in place, hoping I could keep them frozen. I resolved that I would do at least aswell as I had on the hunt. Worst-case scenario, I would stop breathing and run for it. Nervously, I took atiny breath in through my nose, braced for anything.　　It hurt a little, but my throat was already burning dully anyway. Jacob didn't smell that much more humanthan the mountain lion. There was an animal edge to his blood that instantly repelled. Though the loud,wet sound of his heart was appealing, the scent that went with it made my nose wrinkle. It was actuallyeasier with the smell to temper my reaction to the sound and heat of his pulsing blood.　　I took another breath and relaxed. "Huh. I can see what everyone's been going on about. You stink,Jacob."Edward burst into laughter; his hands slipped from my shoulders to wrap around my waist. Seth barkeda low chortle in harmony with Edward; he came a little closer while Leah retreated several paces. Andthen I was aware of another audience when I heard Emmett's low, distinct guffaw, muffled a little by theglass wall between us.　　"Look who's talking," Jacob said, theatrically plugging his nose. His face didn't pucker at all whileEdward embraced me, not even when Edward composed himself and whispered "I love you" in my ear.　　Jacob just kept grinning. This made me feel hopeful that things were going to be right between us, theway they hadn't been for so long now. Maybe now I could truly be his friend, since I disgusted himenough physically that he couldn't love me the same way as before. Maybe that was all that was needed.　　"Okay, so I passed, right?" I said. "Now are you going to tell me what this big secret is?"Jacob's expression became very nervous. "It's nothing you need to worry about this second___"I heard Emmett chuckle again—a sound of anticipation.　　I would have pressed my point, but as I listened to Emmett, I heard other sounds, too. Seven peoplebreathing. One set of lungs moving more rapidly than the others. Only one heart fluttering like a bird'swings, light and quick.　　I was totally diverted. My daughter was just on the other side of that thin wall of glass. I couldn't see her—the light bounced off the reflective windows like a mirror. I could only see myself, looking verystrange—so white and still—compared to Jacob. Or, compared to Edward, looking exactly right.　　"Renesmee," I whispered. Stress made me a statue again. Renesmee wasn't going to smell like an animal.　　Would I put her in danger?　　"Come and see," Edward murmured. "I know you can handle this.""You'll help me?" I whispered through motionless lips.　　"Of course I will.""And Emmett and Jasper—just in case?""We'll take care of you, Bella. Don't worry, we'll be ready. None of us would risk Renesmee. I thinkyou'll be surprised at how entirely she's already wrapped us all around her little fingers. She'll be perfectlysafe, no matter what."My yearning to see her, to understand the worship in his voice, broke my frozen pose. I took a stepforward.　　And then Jacob was in my way, his face a mask of worry.　　"Are you sure, bloodsucker?" he demanded of Edward, his voice almost pleading. I'd never heard himspeak to Edward that way. "I don't like this. Maybe she should wait—""You had your test, Jacob."It was Jacob's test?　　"But—," Jacob began.　　"But nothing," Edward said, suddenly exasperated. "Bella needs to see our daughter. Get out of herway."Jacob shot me an odd, frantic look and then turned and nearly sprinted into the house ahead of us.　　Edward growled.　　I couldn't make sense of their confrontation, and I couldn't concentrate on it, either. I could only thinkabout the blurred child in my memory and struggle against the haziness, trying to remember her faceexactly.　　"Shall we?" Edward said, his voice gentle again.　　I nodded nervously.　　He took my hand tightly in his and led the way into the house.　　They waited for me in a smiling line that was both welcoming and defensive. Rosalie was several pacesbehind the rest of them, near the front door. She was alone until Jacob joined her and then stood in frontof her, closer than was normal. There was no sense of comfort in that closeness; both of them seemed tocringe from the proximity.　　Someone very small was leaning forward out of Rosalie's arms, peering around Jacob. Immediately, shehad my absolute attention, my every thought, the way nothing else had owned them since the moment I'dopened my eyes.　　"I was out just two days?" I gasped, disbelieving.　　The stranger-child in Rosalie's arms had to be weeks, if not months, old. She was maybe twice the sizeof the baby in my dim memory, and she seemed to be supporting her own torso easily as she stretchedtoward me.Her shiny bronze-colored hair fell in ringlets past her shoulders. Her chocolate brown eyesexamined me with an interest that was not at all childlike; it was adult, aware and intelligent. She raisedone hand, reaching in my direction for a moment, and then reached back to touch Rosalie's throat.　　If her face had not been astonishing in its beauty and perfection, I wouldn't have believed it was the samechild. My child.　　But Edward was there in her features, and I was there in the color of her eyes and cheeks. Even Charliehad a place in her thick curls, though their color matched Edward's. She must be ours. Impossible, butstill true.　　Seeing this unanticipated little person did not make her more real, though. It only made her morefantastic.　　Rosalie patted the hand against her neck and murmured, "Yes, that's her."Renesmee's eyes stayed locked on mine. Then, as she had just seconds after her violent birth, she smiledat me. A brilliant flash of tiny, perfect white teeth.　　Reeling inside, I took a hesitant step toward her.　　Everyone moved very fast.　　Emmett and Jasper were right in front of me, shoulder to shoulder, hands ready. Edward gripped mefrom behind, fingers tight again on the tops of my arms. Even Carlisle and Esme moved to get Emmett'sand Jasper's flanks, while Rosalie backed to the door, her arms clutching at Renesmee. Jacob moved,too, keeping his protective stance in front of them.　　Alice was the only one who held her place.　　"Oh, give her some credit," she chided them. "She wasn't going to do anything. You'd want a closerlook, too."Alice was right. I was in control of myself. I'd been braced for anything—for a scent as impossiblyinsistent as the human smell in the woods. The temptation here was really not comparable. Renesmee'sfragrance was perfectly balanced right on the line between the scent of the most beautiful perfume and thescent of the most delicious food. There was enough of the sweet vampire smell to keep the human partfrom being overwhelming.　　I could handle it. I was sure.　　"I'm okay," I promised, patting Edward's hand on my arm. Then I hesitated and added, "Keep close,though, just in case."Jasper's eyes were tight, focused. I knew he was taking in my emotional climate, and I worked onsettling into a steady calm. I felt Edward free my arms as he read Jasper's assessment. But, though Jasperwas getting it firsthand, he didn't seem as certain.　　When she heard my voice, the too-aware child struggled in Rosalie's arms, reaching toward me.　　Somehow, her expression managed to look impatient.　　"Jazz, Em, let us through. Bella's got this.""Edward, the risk—," Jasper said.　　"Minimal. Listen, Jasper—on the hunt she caught the scent of some hikers who were in the wrong placeat the wrong time___"I heard Carlisle suck in a shocked breath. Esme's face was suddenly full of concern mingled withcompassion. Jasper's eyes widened, but he nodded just a tiny bit, as if Edward's words answered somequestion in his head. Jacob's mouth screwed up into a disgusted grimace. Emmett shrugged. Rosalieseemed even less concerned than Emmett as she tried to hold on to the struggling child in her arms.　　Alice's expression told me that she was not fooled. Her narrowed eyes, focused with burning intensity onmy borrowed shirt, seemed more worried about what I'd done to my dress than anything else.　　"Edward!" Carlisle chastened. "How could you be so irresponsible?""I know, Carlisle, I know. I was just plain stupid. I should have taken the time to make sure we were ina safezone before I set her loose.""Edward," I mumbled, embarrassed by the way they stared at me. It was like they were trying to see abrighter red in my eyes.　　"He's absolutely right to rebuke me, Bella," Edward said with a grin. "I made a huge mistake. The factthat you are stronger than anyone I've ever known doesn't change that."Alice rolled her eyes. "Tasteful joke, Edward.""I wasn't making a joke. I was explaining to Jasper why I know Bella can handle this. It's not my faulteveryone jumped to conclusions.""Wait," Jasper gasped. "She didn't hunt the humans?""She started to," Edward said, clearly enjoying himself. My teeth ground together. "She was entirelyfocused on the hunt.""What happened?" Carlisle interjected. His eyes were suddenly bright, an amazed smile beginning toform on his face. It reminded me of before, when he'd wanted the details on my transformationexperience. The thrill of new information.　　Edward leaned toward him, animated. "She heard me behind her and reacted defensively. As soon asmy pursuit broke into her concentration, she snapped right out of it. I've never seen anything to equal her.　　She realized at once what was happening, and then... she held her breath and ran away""Whoa," Emmett murmured. "Seriously?""He's not telling it right," I muttered, more embarrassed than before. "He left out the part where Igrowled at him.""Did ya get in a couple of good swipes?" Emmett asked eagerly.　　"No! Of course not.""No, not really? You really didn't attack him?""Emmett!" I protested.　　"Aw, what a waste," Emmett groaned. "And here you're probably the one person who could take him—since he can't get in your head to cheat—and you had a perfect excuse, too." He sighed. "I've beendying to see how he'd do without that advantage."I glared at him frostily. "I would never."Jasper's frown caught my attention; he seemed even more disturbed than before.　　Edward touched his fist lightly to Jasper's shoulder in a mock punch. "You see what I mean?""It's not natural," Jasper muttered.　　"She could have turned on you—she's only hours old!" Esme scolded, putting her hand against her heart.　　"Oh, we should have gone with you."I wasn't paying so much attention, now that Edward was past the punch line of his joke. I was staring atthe gorgeous child by the door, who was still staring at me. Her little dimpled hands reached out towardme like she knew exactly who I was. Automatically, my hand lifted to mimic hers.　　"Edward," I said, leaning around Jasper to see her better. "Please?"Jasper's teeth were set; he didn't move.　　"Jazz, this isn't anything you've seen before," Alice said quietly. "Trust me."Their eyes met for a short second, and then Jasper nodded. He moved out of my way, but put one handon my shoulder and moved with me as I walked slowly forward.　　I thought about every step before I took it, analyzing my mood, the burn in my throat, the position of theothers around me. How strong I felt versus how well they would be able to contain me. It was a slowprocession.　　And then the child in Rosalie's arms, struggling and reaching all this time while her expression got moreand more irritated, let out a high, ringing wail. Everyone reacted as if—like me—they'd never heard hervoice before.　　They swarmed around her in a second, leaving me standing alone, frozen in place. The sound ofRenesmee's cry pierced right through me, spearing me to the floor. My eyes pricked in the strangest way,like they wanted to tear.　　It seemed like everyone had a hand on her, patting and soothing. Everyone but me.　　"What's the matter? Is she hurt? What happened?"It was Jacob's voice that was loudest, that raised anxiously above the others. I watched in shock as hereached for Renesmee, and then in utter horror as Rosalie surrendered her to him without a fight.　　"No, she's fine," Rosalie reassured him.　　Rosalie was reassuring Jacob?　　Renesmee went to Jacob willingly enough, pushing her tiny hand against his cheek and then squirmingaround to stretch toward me again.　　"See?" Rosalie told him. "She just wants Bella.""She wants me?" I whispered.　　Renesmee's eyes—my eyes—stared impatiently at me.　　Edward darted back to my side. He put his hands lightly on my arms and urged me forward.　　"She's been waiting for you for almost three days," he told me.　　We were only a few feet away from her now. Bursts of heat seemed to tremble out from her to touchme.　　Or maybe it was Jacob who was trembling. I saw his hands shaking as I got closer. And yet, despite hisobvious anxiety, his face was more serene than I had seen it in a long time.　　"Jake—I'm fine," I told him. It made me panicky to see Renesmee in his shaking hands, but I worked tokeep myself in control.　　He frowned at me, eyes tight, like he was just as panicky at the thought of Renesmee in my arms.　　Renesmee whimpered eagerly and stretched, her little hands grasping into fists again and again.　　Something in me clicked into place at that moment. The sound of her cry, the familiarity of her eyes, theway she seemed even more impatient than I did for this reunion—all of it wove together into the mostnatural of patterns as she clutched the air between us. Suddenly, she was absolutely real, and of course Iknew her. It was perfectly ordinary that I should take that last easy step and reach for her, putting myhands exactly where they would fit bestas I pulled her gently toward me.　　Jacob let his long arms stretch so that I could cradle her, but he didn't let go. He shuddered a little whenour skin touched. His skin, always so warm to me before, felt like an open flame to me now. It wasalmost the same temperature as Renesmee's. Perhaps one or two degrees difference.　　Renesmee seemed oblivious to the coolness of my skin, or at least very used to it.　　She looked up and smiled at me again, showing her square little teeth and two dimples. Then, verydeliberately, she reached for my face.　　The moment she did this, all the hands on me tightened, anticipating my reaction. I barely noticed.　　I was gasping, stunned and frightened by the strange, alarming image that filled my mind. It felt like avery strong memory—I could still see through my eyes while I watched it in my head—but it wascompletely unfamiliar. I stared through it to Renesmee's expectant expression, trying to understand whatwas happening, struggling desperately to hold on to my calm.　　Besides being shocking and unfamiliar, the image was also wrong somehow—I almost recognized myown face in it, my old face, but it was off, backward. I grasped quickly that I was seeing my face asothers saw it, rather than flipped in a reflection.　　My memory face was twisted, ravaged, covered in sweat and blood. Despite this, my expression in thevision became an adoring smile; my brown eyes glowed over their deep circles. The image enlarged, myface came closer to the unseen vantage point, and then abruptly vanished.　　Renesmee's hand dropped from my cheek. She smiled wider, dimpling again.　　It was totally silent in the room but for the heartbeats. No one but Jacob and Renesmee was so much asbreathing. The silence stretched on; it seemed like they were waiting for me to say something.　　"What... was... that?" I managed to choke out.　　"What did you see?" Rosalie asked curiously, leaning around Jacob, who seemed very much in the wayand out of place at the moment. "What did she show you?""Srte showed me that?" I whispered.　　"I told you it was hard to explain," Edward murmured in my ear. "But effective as means ofcommunications go.""What was it?" Jacob asked.　　I blinked quickly several times. "Um. Me. I think. But I looked terrible.""It was the only memory she had of you," Edward explained. It was obvious he'd seen what she wasshowing me as she thought of it. He was still cringing, his voice rough from reliving the memory. "She'sletting you know that she's made the connection, that she knows who you are.""Butrtowdidshedothat?"Renesmee seemed unconcerned with my boggling eyes. She was smiling slightly and pulling on a lock ofmy hair.　　"How do I hear thoughts? How does Alice see the future?" Edward asked rhetorically, and thenshrugged.　　"She's gifted.""It's an interesting twist," Carlisle said to Edward. "Like she's doing the exact opposite of what you can.""Interesting," Edward agreed. "I wonder___"I knew they were speculating away, but I didn't care. I was staring at the most beautiful face in theworld. She was hot in my arms, reminding me of the moment when the blackness had almost won, whenthere was nothing in the world left to hold on to. Nothing strong enough to pull me through the crushingdarkness. The moment when I'd thought of Renesmee and found something I would never let go of.　　"I remember you, too," I told her quietly.　　It seemed very natural to lean in and press my lips to her forehead. She smelled wonderful. The scent ofher skin set my throat burning, but it was easy to ignore. It didn't strip the joy from the moment.　　Renesmee was real and I knew her. She was the same one I'd fought for from the beginning. My littlenudger, the one who loved me from the inside, too. Half Edward, perfect and lovely. And half me—which, surprisingly, made her better rather than detracting.　　I'd been right all along. She was worth the fight.　　"She's fine," Alice murmured, probably to Jasper. I could feel them hovering, not trusting me.　　"Haven't we experimented enough for one day?" Jacob asked, his voice a slightly higher pitch withstress. "Okay, Bella's doing great, but let's not push it."I glared at him with real irritation. Jasper shuffled uneasily next to me. We were all crowded so close thatevery tiny movement seemed very big.　　"What is your problem, Jacob?" I demanded. I tugged lightly against his hold on Renesmee, and he juststepped closer to me. He was pressed right up to me, Renesmee touching both of our chests.　　Edward hissed at him. "Just because I understand, it doesn't mean I won't throw you out, Jacob. Bella'sdoing extraordinarily well. Don't ruin the moment for her.""I'll help him toss you, dog," Rosalie promised, her voice seething. "I owe you a good kick in the gut."Obviously, there was no change in that relationship, unless it had gotten worse.　　I glared at Jacob's anxious half-angry expression. His eyes were locked on Renesmee's face. Witheveryone pressed together, he had to be touching at least six different vampires at the moment, and itdidn't even seem to bug him.　　Would he really go through all this just to protect me from myself? What could have happened during mytransformation—my alteration into something he hated—that would soften him so much toward thereason for its necessity?　　I puzzled over it, watching him stare at my daughter. Staring at her like... like he was a blind man seeingthe sun for the very first time.　　"No!"I gasped.　　Jasper's teeth came together and Edward's arms wrapped around my chest like constricting boas. Jacobhad Renesmee out of my arms in the same second, and I did not try to hold on to her. Because I felt itcoming—the snapthat they'd all been waiting for.　　"Rose," I said through my teeth, very slowly and precisely. "Take Renesmee."Rosalie held her hands out, and Jacob handed my daughter to her at once. Both of them backed awayfrom me.　　"Edward, I don't want to hurt you, so please let go of me."He hesitated.　　"Go stand in front of Renesmee," I suggested.　　He deliberated, and then let me go.　　I leaned into my hunting crouch and took two slow steps forward toward Jacob.　　"You didn't," I snarled at him.　　He backed away, palms up, trying to reason with me. "You know it's not something I can control.""You stupid mutt How could you? My babyfHe backed out the front door now as I stalked him, half-running backward down the stairs. "It wasn'tmy idea, Bella!""I've held her all of one time, and already you think you have some moronic wolfy claim to her? She'smine""I can share," he said pleadingly as he retreated across the lawn.　　"Pay up," I heard Emmett say behind me. A small part of my brain wondered who had bet against thisoutcome. I didn't waste much attention on it. I was too furious.　　"How dare you imprint on my baby? Have you lost your mind?""It was involuntary!" he insisted, backing into the trees.　　Then he wasn't alone. The two huge wolves reappeared, flanking him on either side. Leah snapped atme.　　A fearsome snarl ripped through my teeth back at her. The sound disturbed me, but not enough to stopmy advance.　　"Bella, would you try to listen for just a second? Please?" Jacob begged. "Leah, back off," he added.　　Leah curled her lip at me and didn't move.　　"Why should I listen?" I hissed. Fury reigned in my head. It clouded everything else out.　　"Because you're the one who told me this. Do you remember? You said we belonged in each other'slives, right? That we were family. You said that was how you and I were supposed to be. So... now weare. It's what you wanted."I glared ferociously. I did dimly remember those words. But my new quick brain was two steps ahead ofhis nonsense.　　"You think you'll be part of my family as my son-in-lawV I screeched. My bell voice ripped through twooctaves and still came out sounding like music.　　Emmett laughed.　　"Stop her, Edward," Esme murmured. "She'll be unhappy if she hurts him."But I felt no pursuit behind me.　　"No!" Jacob was insisting at the same time. "How can you even look at it that way? She's just a baby,for crying out loud!""That's mypointl" I yelled.　　"You know I don't think of her that way! Do you think Edward would have let me live this long if I did?　　All I want is for her to be safe and happy—is that so bad? So different from what you want?" He wasshouting right back at me.　　Beyond words, I shrieked a growl at him.　　"Amazing, isn't she?" I heard Edward murmur.　　"She hasn't gone for his throat even once," Carlisle agreed, sounding stunned.　　"Fine, you win this one," Emmett said grudgingly.　　"You're going to stay away from her," I hissed up at Jacob.　　"I can't do that!"Through my teeth: "Try. Starting now""It's not possible. Do you remember how much you wanted me around three days ago? How hard itwas to be apart from each other? That's gone for you now, isn't it?"I glared, not sure what he was implying.　　"That was her," he told me. "From the very beginning. We had to be together, even then."I remembered, and then I understood; a tiny part of me was relieved to have the madness explained. Butthat relief somehow only made me angrier. Was he expecting that to be enough for me? That one littleclarification would make me okay with this?　　"Run away while you still can," I threatened.　　"C'mon,Bells! Nessie likes me, too," he insisted.　　I froze. My breathing stopped. Behind me, I heard the lack of sound that was their anxious reaction.　　"What...did youcall her?"Jacob took a step farther back, managing to look sheepish. "Well," he mumbled, "that name you cameup with is kind of a mouthful and—""You nicknamed my daughter after the Loch Ness Monster?" I screeched.　　And then I lunged for his throat.
    Chapter 23 Memories
    I'm so sorry, Seth. I should have been closer."Edward was still apologizing, and I didn't think that was either fair or appropriate. After all, Edwardhadn't completely and inexcusably lost control of his temper. Edward hadn't tried to rip Jacob's head off—Jacob, who wouldn't even phase to protect himself—and then accidentally broken Seth's shoulder andcollarbone when he jumped in between. Edward hadn't almost killed his best friend.　　Not that the best friend didn't have a few things to answer for, but, obviously, nothing Jacob had donecould have mitigated my behavior.　　So shouldn't / have been the one apologizing? I tried again.　　"Seth, I—""Don't worry about it, Bella, I'm totally fine," Seth said at the same time that Edward said, "Bella, love,no one is judging you. You're doing so well."They hadn't let me finish a sentence yet.　　It only made it worse that Edward was having a difficult time keeping the smile off his face. I knew thatJacob didn't deserve my overreaction, but Edward seemed to find something satisfying in it. Maybe hewas just wishing that he had the excuse of being a newborn so that he could do something physical abouthis irritation with Jacob, too.　　I tried to erase the anger from my system entirely, but it was hard, knowing that Jacob was outside withRenesmee right now. Keeping her safe from me, the crazed newborn.　　Carlisle secured another piece of the brace to Seth's arm, and Seth winced.　　"Sorry, sorry!" I mumbled, knowing I'd never get a fully articulated apology out.　　"Don't freak, Bella," Seth said, patting my knee with his good hand while Edward rubbed my arm fromthe other side.　　Seth seemed to feel no aversion to having me sit beside him on the sofa as Carlisle treated him. "I'll beback to normal in half an hour," he continued, still patting my knee as if oblivious to the cold, hard textureof it. "Anyone would have done the same, what with Jake and Ness—" He broke off mid-word andchanged the subject quickly. "I mean, at least you didn't bite me or anything. That would've sucked."I buried my face in my hands and shuddered at the thought, at the very real possibility. It could havehappened so easily. And werewolves didn't react to vampire venom the same way humans did, they'dtold me only now. It was poison to them.　　"I'm a bad person.""Of course you aren't. I should have—," Edward started.　　"Stop that," I sighed. I didn't want him taking the blame for this the way he always took everything onhimself.　　"Lucky thing Ness—Renesmee's not venomous," Seth said after a second of awkward silence. '"Causeshe bites Jake all the time."My hands dropped. "She does?""Sure. Whenever he and Rose don't get dinner in her mouth fast enough. Rose thinks it's prettyhilarious."I stared at him, shocked, and also feeling guilty, because I had to admit that this pleased me a teensy bitin a petulant way.　　Of course, I already knew that Renesmee wasn't venomous. I was the first person she'd bitten. I didn'tmake this observation aloud, as I was feigning memory loss on those recent events.　　"Well, Seth," Carlisle said, straightening up and stepping away from us. "I think that's as much as I cando. Try to not move for, oh, a few hours, I guess." Carlisle chuckled. "I wish treating humans were thisinstantaneously gratifying." He rested his hand for a moment on Seth's black hair. "Stay still," he ordered,and then he disappeared upstairs. I heard his office door close, and I wondered if they'd alreadyremoved the evidence of my time there.　　"I can probably manage sitting still for a while," Seth agreed after Carlisle was already gone, and then heyawned hugely. Carefully, making sure not to tweak his shoulder, Seth leaned his head against the sofa'sback and closed his eyes. Seconds later, his mouth fell slack.　　I frowned at his peaceful face for another minute. Like Jacob, Seth seemed to have the gift of fallingasleep at will. Knowing I wouldn't be able to apologize again for a while, I got up; the motion didn't jostlethe couch in the slightest. Everything physical was so easy. But the rest...　　Edward followed me to the back windows and took my hand.　　Leah was pacing along the river, stopping every now and then to look at the house. It was easy to tellwhen she was looking for her brother and when she was looking for me. She alternated between anxiousglances and murderous glares.　　I could hear Jacob and Rosalie outside on the front steps bickering quietly over whose turn it was tofeed Renesmee. Their relationship was as antagonistic as ever; the only thing they agreed on now wasthat I should be kept away from my baby until I was one hundred percent recovered from my tempertantrum. Edward had disputedtheir verdict, but I'd let it go. I wanted to be sure, too. I was worried, though, that my one hundredpercent sure and their one hundred percent sure might be very different things.　　Other than their squabbling, Seth's slow breathing, and Leah's annoyed panting, it was very quiet.　　Emmett, Alice, and Esme were hunting. Jasper had stayed behind to watch me. He stood unobtrusivelybehind the newel post now, trying not to be obnoxious about it.　　I took advantage of the calm to think of all the things Edward and Seth had told me while Carlislesplinted Seth's arm. I'd missed a whole lot while I was burning, and this was the first real chance to catchup.　　The main thing was the end of the feud with Sam's pack—which was why the others felt safe to comeand go as they pleased again. The truce was stronger than ever. Or more binding, depending on yourviewpoint, I imagined.　　Binding, because the most absolute of all the pack's laws was that no wolf ever kill the object of anotherwolfs imprinting. The pain of such a thing would be intolerable for the whole pack. The fault, whetherintended or accidental, could not be forgiven; the wolves involved would fight to the death—there was noother option. It had happened long ago, Seth told me, but only accidentally. No wolf would everintentionally destroy a brother that way.　　So Renesmee was untouchable because of the way Jacob now felt about her. I tried to concentrate onthe relief of this fact rather than the chagrin, but it wasn't easy. My mind had enough room to feel bothemotions intensely at the same time.　　And Sam couldn't get mad about my transformation, either, because Jacob—speaking as the rightfulAlpha—had allowed it. It rankled to realize over and over again how much I owed Jacob when I justwanted to be mad at him.　　I deliberately redirected my thoughts in order to control my emotions. I considered another interestingphenomenon; though the silence between the separate packs continued, Jacob and Sam had discoveredthat Alphas could speak to each other while in their wolf form. It wasn't the same as before; they couldn'thear every thought the way they had prior to the split. It was more like speaking aloud, Seth had said.　　Sam could only hear the thoughts Jacob wanted to share, and vice versa. They found they couldcommunicate over distance, too, now that they were talking to each other again.　　They hadn't found all this out until Jacob had gone alone—over Seth's and Leah's objections—to explainto Sam about Renesmee; it was the only time he'd left Renesmee since first laying eyes on her.　　Once Sam had understood how absolutely everything had changed, he'd come back with Jacob to talkto Carlisle. They'd spoken in human form (Edward had refused to leave my side to translate), and thetreaty had been renewed. The friendly feeling of the relationship, however, might never be the same.　　One big worry down.　　But there was another that, though not as physically dangerous as an angry wolf pack, still seemed moreurgent to me.　　Charlie.　　He'd spoken to Esme earlier this morning, but that hadn't kept him from calling again, twice, just a fewminutesago while Carlisle treated Seth. Carlisle and Edward had let the phone ring.　　What would be the right thing to tell him? Were the Cullens right? Was telling him that I'd died the best,the kindest way? Would I be able to lie still in a coffin while he and my mother cried over me?　　tt didn't seem right to me. But putting Charlie or Renee in danger of the Volturi's obsession with secrecywas clearly out of the question.　　There was still my idea—let Charlie see me, when I was ready for that, and let him make his own wrongassumptions. Technically, the vampire rules would remain unbroken. Wouldn't it be better for Charlie ifhe knew that I was alive—sort of—and happy? Even if I was strange and different and probablyfrighteningtohim?　　My eyes, in particular, were much too frightening right now. How long before my self-control and myeye color were ready for Charlie?　　"What's the matter, Bella?" Jasper asked quietly, reading my growing tension. "No one is angry withyou"—alow snarl from the riverside contradicted him, but he ignored it—"or even surprised, really. Well,I suppose we are surprised. Surprised that you were able to snap out of it so quickly. You did well.　　Better than anyone expects of you."While he was speaking, the room became very calm. Seth's breathing slipped into a low snore. Ifeltmore peaceful, but I didn't forget my anxieties.　　"I was thinking about Charlie, actually."Out front, the bickering cut off.　　"Ah," Jasper murmured.　　"We really have to leave, don't we?" I asked. "For a while, at the very least. Pretend we're in Atlanta orsomething."I could feel Edward's gaze locked on my face, but I looked at Jasper. He was the one who answeredme in a grave tone.　　"Yes. It's the only way to protect your father."I brooded for a moment. "I'm going to miss him so much. I'll miss everyone here."Jacob,I thought, despite myself. Though that yearning was both vanished and defined—and I was vastlyrelieved that it was—he was still my friend. Someone who knew the real me and accepted her. Even as amonster.　　I thought about what Jacob had said, pleading with me before I'd attacked him. You said we belongedin each other's lives, right? That we were family. You said that was how you and I were supposedto be. So... now we are. It's what you wanted.　　But it didn't feel like how I'd wanted it. Not exactly. I remembered further back, to the fuzzy, weakmemories of my human life. Back to the very hardest part to remember—the time without Edward, atime so dark I'd tried to bury it in my head. I couldn't get the words exactly right; I only rememberedwishing that Jacob were my brother so that we could love each other without any confusion or pain.　　Family. But I'd never factored a daughter into the equation.　　I remembered a little later—one of the many times that I'd told Jacob goodbye—wondering aloud whohe would end up with, who would make his life right after what I'd done to it. I had said something abouthow whoever she was,she wouldn't be good enough for him.　　I snorted, and Edward raised one eyebrow questioningly. I just shook my head at him.　　But as much as I might miss my friend, I knew there was a bigger problem. Had Sam or Jared or Quilever gone a whole day without seeing the objects of their fixations, Emily, Kim, and Claire? Could they?　　What would the separation from Renesmee do to Jacob? Would it cause him pain?　　There was still enough petty ire in my system to make me glad, not for his pain, but for the idea of havingRenesmee away from him. How was I supposed to deal with having her belong to Jacob when she onlybarely seemed to belong to me?　　The sound of movement on the front porch interrupted my thoughts. I heard them get up, and then theywere through the door. At exactly the same time, Carlisle came down the stairs with his hands full of oddthings—a measuring tape, a scale. Jasper darted to my side. As if there was some signal I'd missed, evenLeah sat down outside and stared through the window with an expression like she was expectingsomething that was both familiar and also totally uninteresting.　　"Must be six," Edward said.　　"So?" I asked, my eyes locked on Rosalie, Jacob, and Renesmee. They stood in the doorway,Renesmee in Rosalie's arms. Rose looked wary. Jacob looked troubled. Renesmee looked beautiful andimpatient.　　"Time to measure Ness—er, Renesmee," Carlisle explained.　　"Oh. You do this every day?""Four times a day," Carlisle corrected absently as he motioned the others toward the couch. I thought Isaw Renesmee sigh.　　"Four times? Every day? Why?""She's still growing quickly," Edward murmured to me, his voice quiet and strained. He squeezed myhand, and his other arm wrapped securely around my waist, almost as if he needed the support.　　I couldn't take my eyes off Renesmee to check his expression.　　She looked perfect, absolutely healthy. Her skin glowed like backlit alabaster; the color in her cheekswas rose petals against it. There couldn't be anything wrong with such radiant beauty. Surely there couldbe nothing more dangerous in her life than her mother. Could there?　　The difference between the child I'd given birth to and the one I'd met again an hour ago would havebeen obvious to anyone. The difference between Renesmee an hour ago and Renesmee now was subtler.　　Human eyes never would have detected it. But it was there.　　Her body was slightly longer. Just a little bit slimmer. Her face wasn't quite as round; it was more oval byone minute degree. Her ringlets hung a sixteenth of an inch lower down her shoulders. She stretched outhelpfully in Rosalie's arms while Carlisle ran the tape measure down the length of her and then used it tocircle her head. He took no notes; perfect recall.　　I was aware that Jacob's arms were crossed as tightly over his chest as Edward's arms were lockedaroundme. His heavy brows were mashed together into one line over his deep-set eyes.　　She had matured from a single cell to a normal-sized baby in the course of a few weeks. She lookedwell on her way to being a toddler just days after her birth. If this rate of growth held...　　My vampire mind had no trouble with the math.　　"What do we do?" I whispered, horrified.　　Edward's arms tightened. He understood exactly what I was asking. "I don't know.""It's slowing," Jacob muttered through his teeth.　　"We'll need several more days of measurements to track the trend, Jacob. I can't make any promises.""Yesterday she grew two inches. Today it's less.""By a thirty-second of an inch, if my measurements are perfect," Carlisle said quietly.　　"Be perfect, Doc," Jacob said, making the words almost threatening. Rosalie stiffened.　　"You know I'll do my best," Carlisle assured him.　　Jacob sighed. "Guess that's all I can ask."I felt irritated again, like Jacob was stealing my lines—and delivering them all wrong.　　Renesmee seemed irritated, too. She started to squirm and then reached her hand imperiously towardRosalie. Rosalie leaned forward so that Renesmee could touch her face. After a second, Rose sighed.　　"What does she want?" Jacob demanded, taking my line again.　　"Bella, of course," Rosalie told him, and her words made my insides feel a little warmer. Then shelooked at me. "How are you?""Worried," I admitted, and Edward squeezed me.　　"We all are. But that's not what I meant.""I'm in control," I promised. Thirstiness was way down the list right now. Besides, Renesmee smelledgood in a very non-food way.　　Jacob bit his lip but made no move to stop Rosalie as she offered Renesmee to me. Jasper and Edwardhovered but allowed it. I could see how tense Rose was, and I wondered how the room felt to Jasperright now. Or was he focusing so hard on me that he couldn't feel the others?　　Renesmee reached for me as I reached for her, a blinding smile lighting her face. She fit so easily in myarms, like they'd been shaped just for her. Immediately, she put her hot little hand against my cheek.　　Though I was prepared, it still made me gasp to see the memory like a vision in my head. So bright andcolorful but also completely transparent.　　She was remembering me charging Jacob across the front lawn, remembering Seth leaping between us.　　She'd seen and heard it all with perfect clarity. It didn't look like me, this graceful predator leaping at herprey like an arrow arcing from a bow. It had to be someone else. That made me feel a very small bit lessguilty as Jacob stood there defenselessly with his hands raised in front of him. His hands did not tremble.　　Edward chuckled, watching Renesmee's thoughts with me. And then we both winced as we heard thecrack ofSeth's bones.　　Renesmee smiled her brilliant smile, and her memory eyes did not leave Jacob through all the followingmess. I tasted a new flavor to the memory—not exactly protective, more possessive—as she watchedJacob. I got the distinct impression that she was glad Seth had put himself in front of my spring. Shedidn't want Jacob hurt. He was hers.　　"Oh, wonderful,'71 groaned. "Perfect.""It's just because he tastes better than the rest of us," Edward assured me, voice stiff with his ownannoyance.　　"I told you she likes me, too," Jacob teased from across the room, his eyes on Renesmee. His jokingwas halfhearted; the tense angle of his eyebrows had not relaxed.　　Renesmee patted my face impatiently, demanding my attention. Another memory: Rosalie pulling a brushgently through each of her curls. It felt nice.　　Carlisle and his tape measure, knowing she had to stretch and be still. It was not interesting to her.　　"It looks like she's going to give you a rundown of everything you missed," Edward commented in myear.　　My nose wrinkled as she dumped the next one on me. The smell coming from a strange metal cup—hard enough not to be bitten through easily—sent a flash burn through my throat. Ouch.　　And then Renesmee was out of my arms, which were pinned behind my back. I didn't struggle withJasper; I just looked at Edward's frightened face.　　"What did I do?"Edward looked at Jasper behind me, and then at me again.　　"But she was remembering being thirsty," Edward muttered, his forehead pressing into lines. "She wasremembering the taste of human blood."Jasper's arms pulled mine tighter together. Part of my head noted that this wasn't particularlyuncomfortable, let alone painful, as it would have been to a human. It was just annoying. I was sure Icould break his hold, but I didn't fight it.　　"Yes," I agreed. "And?"Edward frowned at me for a second more, and then his expression loosened. He laughed once. "Andnothing at all, it seems. The overreaction is mine this time. Jazz, let her go."The binding hands disappeared. I reached out for Renesmee as soon as I was free. Edward handed herto me without hesitation.　　"I can't understand," Jasper said. "I can't bear this."I watched in surprise as Jasper strode out the back door. Leah moved to give him a wide margin ofspace as he paced to the river and then launched himself over it in one bound.　　Renesmee touched my neck, repeating the scene of departure right back, like an instant replay. I couldfeel the question in her thought, an echo of mine.　　I was already over the shock of her odd little gift. It seemed an entirely natural part of her, almost to beexpected. Maybe now that I was part of the supernatural myself, I would never be a skeptic again.　　But what was wrong with Jasper?　　"He'll be back," Edward said, whether to me or Renesmee, I wasn't sure. "He just needs a momentalone to readjust his perspective on life." There was a grin threatening at the corners of his mouth.　　Another human memory—Edward telling me that Jasper would feel better about himself if I "had a hardtime adjusting" to being a vampire. This was in the context of a discussion about how many people Iwould kill my first newborn year.　　"Is he mad at me?" I asked quietly.　　Edward's eyes widened. "No. Why would he be?""What's the matter with him, then?""He's upset with himself, not you, Bella. He's worrying about... self-fulfilling prophecy, I suppose youcould say.""How so?" Carlisle asked before I could.　　"He's wondering if the newborn madness is really as difficult as we've always thought, or if, with the rightfocus and attitude, anyone could do as well as Bella. Even now—perhaps he only has such difficultybecause he believes it's natural and unavoidable. Maybe if he expected more of himself, he would rise tothose expectations. You're making him question a lot of deep-rooted assumptions, Bella.""But that's unfair," Carlisle said. "Everyone is different; everyone has their own challenges. Perhaps whatBella is doing goes beyond the natural. Maybe this is her gift, so to speak."I froze with surprise. Renesmee felt the change, and touched me. She remembered the last second oftime and wondered why.　　"That's an interesting theory, and quite plausible," Edward said.　　For a tiny space, I was disappointed. What? No magic visions, no formidable offensive abilities like, oh,shooting lightning bolts from my eyes or something? Nothing helpful or cool at all?　　And then I realized what that might mean, if my "superpower" was no more than exceptional self-control.　　For one thing, at least I had a gift. It could have been nothing.　　But, much more than that, if Edward was right, then I could skip right over the part I'd feared the verymost.　　What if I didn't have to be a newborn? Not in the crazed killing-machine sense, anyway. What if I couldfit right in with the Cullens from my first day? What if we didn't have to hide out somewhere remote for ayear while I "grew up"? What if, like Carlisle, I never killed a single person? What if I could be a goodvampire right away?　　I could see Charlie.　　I sighed as soon as reality filtered through hope. I couldn't see Charlie right away. The eyes, the voice,the perfected face. What could I possibly say to him; how could I even begin? I was furtively glad that Ihad some excuses for putting things off for a while; as much as I wanted to find some way to keepCharlie in my life, I was terrified of that first meeting. Seeing his eyes pop as he took in my new face, mynew skin. Knowing that he was frightened. Wondering what dark explanation would form in his head.　　I was chicken enough to wait for a year while my eyes cooled. And here I'd thought I would be sofearless when I was indestructible.　　"Have you ever seen an equivalent to self-control as a talent?" Edward asked Carlisle. "Do you reallythink that's a gift, or just a product of all her preparation?"Carlisle shrugged, 'it's slightly similar to what Siobhan has always been able to do, though she wouldn'tcall it agift.""Siobhan, your friend in that Irish coven?" Rosalie asked. 1 wasn't aware that she did anything special. Ithoughtit was Maggie who was talented in that bunch.""Yes, Siobhan thinks the same. But she has this way of deciding her goals and then almost... willingthem into reality. She considers it good planning, but I've always wondered if it was something more.　　When she included Maggie, for instance. Liam was very territorial, but Siobhan wanted it to work out,and so it did."Edward, Carlisle, and Rosalie settled into chairs as they continued with the discussion. Jacob sat next toSeth protectively, looking bored. From the way his eyelids drooped, I was sure he'd be unconsciousmomentarily.　　I listened, but my attention was divided. Renesmee was still telling me about her day. I held her by thewindow wall, my arms rocking her automatically as we stared into each other's eyes.　　I realized that the others had no reason for sitting down. I was perfectly comfortable standing. It was justas restful as stretching out on a bed would be. I knew I would be able to stand like this for a weekwithout moving and I would feel just as relaxed at the end of the seven days as I did at the beginning.　　They must sit out of habit. Humans would notice someone standing for hours without ever shifting herweight to a different foot. Even now, I saw Rosalie brush her fingers against her hair and Carlisle crosshis legs. Little motions to keep from being too still, too much a vampire. I would have to pay attention towhat they did and start practicing.　　I rolled my weight back to my left leg. It felt kind of silly.　　Maybe they were just trying to give me a little alone time with my baby—as alone as was safe.　　Renesmee told me about every minute happening of the day, and I got the feeling from the tenor of herlittle stories that she wanted me to know her every bit as much I wanted the same thing. It worried herthat I had missed things—like the sparrows that had hopped closer and closer when Jacob had held her,both of them very still beside one of the big hemlocks; the birds wouldn't come close to Rosalie. Or theoutrageously icky white stuff—baby formula—that Carlisle had put in her cup; it smelled like sour dirt.　　Or the song Edward had crooned to her that was so perfect Renesmee played it for me twice; I wassurprised that I was in the background of that memory, perfectly motionless but looking fairly batteredstill. I shuddered, remembering that time from my own perspective. The hideous fire...　　After almost an hour—the others were still deeply absorbed in their discussion, Seth and Jacob snoringin harmony on the couch—Renesmee's memory stories began to slow. They got slightly blurry around theedges and drifted out of focus before they came to their conclusions. I was about to interrupt Edward ina panic—was there something wrong with her?—when her eyelids fluttered and closed. She yawned, herplump pink lips stretching into around O, and her eyes never reopened.　　Her hand fell away from my face as she drifted to sleep—the backs of her eyelids were the palelavender color of thin clouds before the sunrise. Careful not to disturb her, I lifted that hand back to myskin and held it there curiously. At first there was nothing, and then, after a few minutes, a flickering ofcolors like a handful of butterflies were scattering from her thoughts.　　Mesmerized, I watched her dreams. There was no sense to it. Just colors and shapes and faces. I waspleased by how often my face—both of my faces, hideous human and glorious immortal—cropped up inher unconscious thoughts. More than Edward or Rosalie. I was neck and neck with Jacob; I tried not tolet that get to me.　　For the first time, I understood how Edward had been able to watch me sleep night after boring night,just to hear me talk in my sleep. I could watch Renesmee dream forever.　　The change in Edward's tone caught my attention when he said, "Finally," and turned to gaze out thewindow. It was deep, purply night outside, but I could see just as far as before. Nothing was hidden inthe darkness; everything had just changed colors.　　Leah, still glowering, got up and slunk into the brush just as Alice came into view on the other side of theriver. Alice swung back and forth from a branch like a trapeze artist, toes touching hands, beforethrowing her body into a graceful flat spin over the river. Esme made a more traditional leap, whileEmmett charged right through the water, splashing water so far that splatters hit the back windows. Tomy surprise, Jasper followed after, his own efficient leap seeming understated, even subtle, after theothers. kThe huge grin stretching Alice's face was familiar in a dim, odd way. Everyone was suddenly smiting atme—Esme sweet, Emmett excited, Rosalie a little superior, Carlisle indulgent, and Edward expectant.　　Alice skipped into the room ahead of everyone else, her hand stretched out in front of her andimpatience making a nearly visible aura around her. In her palm was an everyday brass key with anoversized pink satin bow tied around it.　　She held the key out for me, and I automatically gripped Renesmee more securely in my right arm sothat I could open my left. Alice dropped the key into it.　　"Happy birthday!" she squealed.　　I rolled my eyes. "No one starts counting on the actual day of birth," I reminded her. "Your first birthdayis at the year mark, Alice."Her grin turned smug. "We're not celebrating your vampire birthday. Yet. It's September thirteenth,Bella. Happy nineteenth birthday!"
    Chapter 24 Surprise
    "No. No way!" I shook my head fiercely and then shot a glance at the smug smile on myseventeen-year-old husband's face. "No, this doesn't count. I stopped aging three days ago. I ameighteen forever.""Whatever," Alice said, dismissing my protest with a quick shrug. "We're celebrating anyway, so suck itup."I sighed. There was rarely a point to arguing with Alice.　　Her grin got impossibly wider as she read the acquiescence in my eyes.　　"Are you ready to open your present?" Alice sang.　　"Presents," Edward corrected, and he pulled another key—this one longer and silver with a less gaudyblue bow—from his pocket.　　I struggled to keep from rolling my eyes. I knew immediately what this key was to—the "after car." Iwondered if I should feel excited. It seemed the vampire conversion hadn't given me any sudden interestin sports cars.　　"Mine first," Alice said, and then stuck her tongue out, foreseeing his answer.　　"Mine is closer.""But look at how she's dressed" Alice's words were almost a moan. "It's been killing me all day. That isclearly the priority."My eyebrows pulled together as I wondered how a key could get me into new clothes. Had she gottenme a whole trunkful?　　"I know—I'll play you for it," Alice suggested. "Rock, paper, scissors."Jasper chuckled and Edward sighed.　　"Why you don't you just tell me who wins?" Edward said wryly.　　Alice beamed. "I do. Excellent.""It's probably better that I wait for morning, anyway." Edward smiled crookedly at me and then noddedtowardJacob and Seth, who looked like they were crashed for the night; I wonder how long they'd stayed upthis time. "I think it might be more fun if Jacob was awake for the big reveal, don't you agree? So thatsomeone there is able to express the right level of enthusiasm?"I grinned back. He knew me well.　　"Yay," Alice sang. "Bella, give Ness—Renesmee to Rosalie.""Where does she usually sleep?"Alice shrugged. "In Rose's arms. Or Jacob's. Or Esme's. You get the picture. She has never been setdown in her entire life. She's going to be the most spoiled half-vampire in existence."Edward laughed while Rosalie took Renesmee expertly in her arms. "She is also the most unspoiledhalf-vampire in existence," Rosalie said. "The beauty of being one of a kind."Rosalie grinned at me, and I was glad to see that the new comradeship between us was still there in hersmile. I hadn't been entirely sure it would last after Renesmee's life was no longer tied to mine. But maybewe had fought together on the same side long enough that we would always be friends now. I'd finallymade the same choice she would have if she'd been in my shoes. That seemed to have washed away herresentment for all my other choices.　　Alice shoved the beribboned key in my hand, then grabbed my elbow and steered me toward the backdoor. "Let's go, let's go," she trilled.　　"Is it outside?""Sort of," Alice said, pushing me forward.　　"Enjoy your gift," Rosalie said. "It's from all of us. Esme especially.""Aren't you coming, too?" I realized that no one had moved.　　"We'll give you a chance to appreciate it alone," Rosalie said. "You can tell us about it... later."Emmett guffawed. Something about his laugh made me feel like blushing, though I wasn't sure why.　　I realized that lots of things about me—like truly hating surprises, and not liking gifts in general muchmore—had not changed one bit. It was a relief and revelation to discover how much of my essential coretraits had come with me into this new body.　　I hadn't expected to be myself. I smiled widely.　　Alice tugged my elbow, and I couldn't stop smiling as I followed her into the purple night. Only Edwardcame with us.　　"There's the enthusiasm I'm looking for," Alice murmured approvingly. Then she dropped my arm, madetwo lithe bounds, and leaped over the river.　　"C'mon, Bella," she called from the other side.　　Edward jumped at the same time I did; it was every bit as fun as it had been this afternoon. Maybe alittle bit more fun because the night changed everything into new, rich colors.　　Alice took off with us on her heels, heading due north. It was easier to follow the sound of her feetwhispering against the ground and the fresh path of her scent than it was to keep my eyes on her throughthe thick vegetation.　　At no sign I could see, she whirled and dashed back to where I paused.　　"Don't attack me," she warned, and sprang at me.　　"What are you doing?" I demanded, squirming as she scrambled onto my back and wrapped her handsaround my face. I felt the urge to throw her off, but I controlled it.　　"Making sure you can't see.""I could take care of that without the theatrics," Edward offered.　　"You might let her cheat. Take her hand and lead her forward.""Alice, I—""Don't bother, Bella. We're doing this my way."I felt Edward's fingers weave through mine. "Just a few seconds more, Bella. Then she'll go annoysomeone else." He pulled me forward. I kept up easily. I wasn't afraid of hitting a tree; the tree would bethe only one getting hurt in that scenario.　　"You might be a little more appreciative," Alice chided him. "This is as much for you as it is for her.""True. Thank you again, Alice.""Yeah, yeah. Okay." Alice's voice suddenly shot up with excitement. "Stop there. Turn her just a little tothe right. Yes, like that. Okay. Are you ready?" she squeaked.　　"I'm ready." There were new scents here, piquing my interest, increasing my curiosity. Scents that didn'tbelong in the deep woods. Honeysuckle. Smoke. Roses. Sawdust? Something metallic, too. The richnessof deep earth, dug up and exposed. I leaned toward the mystery.　　Alice hopped down from my back, releasing her grip on my eyes.　　I stared into the violet dark. There, nestled into a small clearing in the forest, was a tiny stone cottage,lavender gray in the light of the stars.　　It belonged here so absolutely that it seemed as if it must have grown from the rock, a natural formation.　　Honeysuckle climbed up one wall like a lattice, winding all the way up and over the thick woodenshingles. Late summer roses bloomed in a handkerchief-sized garden under the dark, deep-set windows.　　There was a little path of flat stones, amethyst in the night, that led up to the quaint arched wooden door.　　I curled my hand around the key I held, shocked.　　"What do you think?" Alice's voice was soft now; it fit with the perfect quiet of the storybook scene.　　I opened my mouth but said nothing.　　"Esme thought we might like a place of our own for a while, but she didn't want us too far away,"Edward murmured. "And she loves any excuse to renovate. This little place has been crumbling away outhere for at least a hundred years."I continued staring, mouth gaping like a fish.　　"Don't you like it?" Alice's face fell. "I mean, I'm sure we could fix it up differently, if you want. Emmettwas all for adding a few thousand square feet, a second story, columns, and a tower, but Esme thoughtyou would like it bestthe way it was meant to look." Her voice started to climb, to go faster. "If she was wrong, we can getback to work. It won't take long to—""Shh!" I managed.　　She pressed her lips together and waited. It took me a few seconds to recover.　　"You're giving me a house for my birthday?" I whispered.　　"Us," Edward corrected. "And it's no more than a cottage. I think the word house implies morelegroom.""No knocking my house," I whispered to him.　　Alice beamed. "You like it."I shook my head.　　"Love it?"I nodded.　　"I can't wait totell Esme!""Why didn't she come?"Alice's smile faded a little, twisted just off what it hadbeen, like my question was hard to answer. "Oh,you know... they all remember how you are about presents. They didn't want to put you under too muchpressure to like it.""But of course I love it. How could I not?""They'll like that." She patted my arm. "Anyhoo, your closet is stocked.Use it wisely. And... I guessthat's everything.""Aren't you going to come inside?"She strolled casually a few feet back. "Edward knows his way around. I'll stop by... later. Call me if youcan't match your clothes right." She threw me a doubtful look and then smiled. "Jazz wants to hunt. Seeyou."She shot off into the trees like the most graceful bullet.　　"That was weird," I said when the sound of her flight had vanished completely. "Am I really that bad?　　They didn't have to stay away. Now I feel guilty. I didn't even thank her right. We should go back,tellEsme—""Bella,don't besilly. No one thinks you're that unreasonable.""Then what—""Alone time is their other gift. Alice was trying to be subtle about it.""Oh."That was all it took to make the house disappear. We could have been anywhere. I didn't see the treesor the stones or the stars. It was just Edward.　　"Let me show you what they've done," he said, pulling my hand. Was he oblivious to the fact that anelectric current was pulsing through my body like adrenaline-spiked blood?　　Once again I felt oddly off balance, waiting for reactions my body wasn't capable of anymore. My heartshould have been thundering like a steam engine about to hit us. Deafening. My cheeks should have beenbrilliant red.　　For that matter, I ought to have been exhausted. This had been the longest day of my life.　　I laughed out loud—just one quiet little laugh of shock—when I realized that this day would never end.　　"Do I get to hear the joke?""It's not a very good one," I told him as he led the way to the little rounded door. "I was just thinking—today is the first and last day of forever. It's kind of hard to wrap my head around it. Even with all thisextra room for wrapping." I laughed again.　　He chuckled with me. He held his hand out toward the doorknob, waiting for me to do the honors. Istuck the key in the lock and turned it.　　"You're such a natural at this, Bella; I forget how very strange this all must be for you. I wish I couldhear it." He ducked down and yanked me up into his arms so fast that I didn't see it coming—and thatwas really something.　　"Hey!""Thresholds are part of my job description," he reminded me. "But I'm curious. Tell me what you'rethinking about right now."He opened the door—it fell back with a barely audible creak—and stepped through into the little stoneliving room.　　"Everything," I told him. "All at the same time, you know. Good things and things to worry about andthings that are new. How I keep using too many superlatives in my head. Right now, I'm thinking thatEsme is an artist. It's so perfect!"The cottage room was something from a fairy tale. The floor was a crazy quilt of smooth, flat stones. Thelow ceiling had long exposed beams that someone as tall as Jacob would surely knock his head on. Thewalls were warm wood in some places, stone mosaics in others. The beehive fireplace in the corner heldthe remains of a slow flickering fire. It was driftwood burning there—the low flames were blue and greenfrom the salt.　　It was furnished in eclectic pieces, not one of them matching another, but harmonious just the same. Onechair seemed vaguely medieval, while a low ottoman by the fire was more contemporary and the stockedbookshelf against the far window reminded me of movies set in Italy. Somehow each piece fit togetherwith the others like a big three-dimensional puzzle. There were a few paintings on the walls that Irecognized—some of my very favorites from the big house. Priceless originals, no doubt, but theyseemed to belong here, too, like all the rest.　　It was a place where anyone could believe magic existed. A place where you just expected Snow Whiteto walk right in with her apple in hand, or a unicorn to stop and nibble at the rosebushes.　　Edward had always thought that he belonged to the world of horror stories. Of course, I'd known hewas dead wrong. It was obvious that he belonged here. In a fairy tale.　　And now I was in the story with him.　　I was about to take advantage of the fact that he hadn't gotten around to setting me back on my feet andthat his wits-scramblingly beautiful face was only inches away when he said, "We're lucky Esme thoughtto add an extra room. No one was planning for Ness—Renesmee."I frowned at him, my thoughts channeled down a less pleasant path.　　"Not you, too," I complained.　　"Sorry, love. I hear it in their thoughts all the time, you know. It's rubbing off on me."I sighed. My baby, the sea serpent. Maybe there was no help for it. Well, /wasn't giving in.　　Tm sure you're dying to see the closet. Or, at least I'll tell Alice that you were, to make her feel good.""Should I be afraid?""Terrified."He carried me down a narrow stone hallway with tiny arches in the ceiling, like it was our own miniaturecastle.　　"That will be Renesmee's room," he said, nodding to an empty room with a pale wooden floor. "Theydidn't have time to do much with it, what with the angry werewolves___"I laughed quietly, amazed at how quickly everything had turned right when it had all had looked sonightmarish just a week ago.　　Drat Jacob for making everything perfect this way.　　"Here's our room. Esme tried to bring some of her island back here for us. She guessed that we wouldget attached."The bed was huge and white, with clouds of gossamer floating down from the canopy to the floor. Thepale wood floor matched the other room, and now I grasped that it was precisely the color of a pristinebeach. The walls were that almost-white-blue of a brilliant sunny day, and the back wall had big glassdoors that opened into a little hidden garden. Climbing roses and a small round pond, smooth as a mirrorand edged with shiny stones. A tiny, calm ocean for us.　　"Oh" was all I could say.　　"I know," he whispered.　　We stood there for a minute, remembering. Though the memories were human and clouded, they tookover my mind completely.　　He smiled a wide, gleaming smile and then laughed. "The closet is through those double doors. I shouldwarn you—it's bigger than this room."I didn't even glance at the doors. There was nothing else in the world but him again—his arms curledunder me, his sweet breath on my face, his lips just inches from mine—and there was nothing that coulddistract me now, newborn vampire or not.　　"We're going to tell Alice that I ran right to the clothes," I whispered, twisting my fingers into his hair andpulling my face closer to his. "We're going to tell her I spent hours in there playing dress-up. We're goingto lie"He caught up to my mood in an instant, or maybe he'd already been there, and he was just trying to letme fully appreciate my birthday present, like a gentleman. He pulled my face to his with a suddenfierceness, a low moan in his throat. The sound sent the electric current running through my body into anear-frenzy, like I couldn't get close enough to him fast enough.　　I heard the fabric tearing under our hands, and I was glad my clothes, at least, were already destroyed.　　It was too late for his. It felt almost rude to ignore the pretty white bed, but we just weren't going tomake it that far.　　This second honeymoon wasn't like our first.　　Our time on the island had been the epitome of my human life. The very best of it. I'd been so ready tostring along my human time, just to hold on to what I had with him for a little while longer. Because thephysical part wasn't going to be the same ever again.　　I should have guessed, after a day like today, that it would be better.　　I could really appreciate him now—could properly see every beautiful line of his perfect face, of his long,flawless body with my strong new eyes, every angle and every plane of him. I could taste his pure, vividscent on my tongue and feel the unbelievable silkiness of his marble skin under my sensitive fingertips.　　My skin was so sensitive under his hands, too.　　He was all new, a different person as our bodies tangled gracefully into one on the sand-pale floor. Nocaution, no restraint. No fear—especially not that. We could love together— both active participantsnow. Finally equals.　　Like our kisses before, every touch was more than I was used to. So much of himself he'd been holdingback. Necessary at the time, but I couldn't believe how much I'd been missing.　　I tried to keep in mind that I was stronger than he was, but it was hard to focus on anything withsensations so intense, pulling my attention to a million different places in my body every second; if I hurthim, he didn't complain.　　A very, very small part of my head considered the interesting conundrum presented in this situation. Iwas never going to get tired, and neither was he. We didn't have to catch our breath or rest or eat oreven use the bathroom; we had no more mundane human needs. He had the most beautiful, perfect bodyin the world and I had him all to myself, and it didn't feel like I was ever going to find a point where Iwould think, Now I've had enough for one day. I was always going to want more. And the day wasnever going to end. So, in such a situation, how did we ever stop?　　It didn't bother me at all that I had no answer.　　I sort of noticed when the sky began to lighten. The tiny ocean outside turned from black to gray, and alark started to sing somewhere very close by—maybe she had a nest in the roses.　　"Do you miss it?" I asked him when her song was done.　　It wasn't the first time we'd spoken, but we weren't exactly keeping up a conversation, either.　　"Miss what?" he murmured.　　"All of it—the warmth, the soft skin, the tasty smell... I'm not losing anything at all, and I just wondered ifit was a little bit sad for you that you were."He laughed, low and gentle. "It would be hard to find someone less sad than I am now. Impossible, I'dventure. Not many people get every single thing they want, plus all the things they didn't think to ask for,in the same day.""Are you avoiding the question?"He pressed his hand against my face. "You are warm," he told me.　　It was true, in a sense. To me, his hand was warm. It wasn't the same as touching Jacob's flame-hotskin, but it was more comfortable. More natural.　　Then he pulled his fingers very slowly down my face, lightly tracing from my jaw to my throat and then allthe way down to my waist. My eyes rolled back into my head a little.　　"You are soft."His fingers were like satin against my skin, so I could see what he meant.　　"And as for the scent, well, I couldn't say I missed that. Do you remember the scent of those hikers onour hunt?""I've been trying very hard not to.""Imagine kissing that."My throat ripped into flames like pulling the cord on a hot-air balloon.　　"0/7.""Precisely. So the answer is no. I am purely full of joy, because I am missing nothing. No one has morethan I do now."I was about to inform him of the one exception to his statement, but my lips were suddenly very busy.　　When the little pool turned pearl-colored with the sunrise, I thought of another question for him.　　"How long does this go on? I mean, Carlisle and Esme, Em and Rose, Alice and Jasper—they don'tspend all day locked in their rooms. They're out in public, fully clothed, all the time. Does this... cravingever let up?" I twisted myself closer into him—quite an accomplishment, actually—to make it clear what Iwas talking about.　　"That's difficult to say. Everyone is different and, well, so far you're the very most different of all. Theaverage young vampire is too obsessed with thirst to notice much else for a while. That doesn't seem toapply to you. With the average vampire, though, after that first year, other needs make themselvesknown. Neither thirst nor any other desire really ever fades. It's simply a matter of learning to balancethem, learning to prioritize and manage___""How long?"He smiled, wrinkling his nose a little. "Rosalie and Emmett were the worst. It took a solid decade beforeI could stand to be within a five-mile radius of them. Even Carlisle and Esme had a difficult timestomaching it. They kicked the happy couple out eventually. Esme built them a house, too. It was granderthan this one, but then, Esme knows what Rose likes, and she knows what you like.""So, after ten years, then?" I was pretty sure that Rosalie and Emmett had nothing on us, but it mightsound cocky if I went higher than a decade. "Everybody is normal again? Like they are now?"Edward smiled again. "Well, I'm not sure what you mean by normal. You've seen my family going aboutlife in a fairly human way, but you've been sleeping nights." He winked at me. "There's a tremendousamount of time left over when you don't have to sleep. It makes balancing your... interests quite easy.　　There's a reason why I'm the best musician in the family, why—besides Carlisle—I've read the mostbooks, studied the most sciences, become fluentin the most languages.... Emmett would have you believe that I'm such a know-it-all because of the mindreading, but the truth is that I've just had a lot of free time."We laughed together, and the motion of our laughter did interesting things to the way our bodies wereconnected, effectively ending that conversation.
    Chapter 25 Favor
    It was only a little while later that Edward reminded me of my priorities.　　It took him just one word.　　"Renesmee..."I sighed. She would be awake soon. It must be nearly seven in the morning. Would she be looking forme? Abruptly, something close to panic had my body freezing up. What would she look like today?　　Edward felt the total distraction of my stress. "It's all right, love. Get dressed, and we'll be back to thehouse in two seconds."I probably looked like a cartoon, the way I sprung up, then looked back at him—his diamond bodyfaintly glinting in the diffuse light—then away to the west, where Renesmee waited, then back at himagain, then back toward her, my head whipping from side to side a half dozen times in a second. Edwardsmiled, but didn't laugh; he was a strong man.　　"It's all about balance, love. You're so good at all of this, I don't imagine it will take too long to puteverything in perspective.""And we have all night, right?"He smiled wider. "Do you think I could bear to let you get dressed now if that weren't the case?"That would have to be enough to get me through the daylight hours. I would balance this overwhelming,devastating desire so that I could be a good— It was hard to think the word. Though Renesmee wasvery real and vital in my life, it was still difficult to think of myself as a mother. I supposed anyone wouldfeel the same, though, without nine months to get used to the idea. And with a child that changed by thehour.　　The thought of Renesmee's speeding life had me stressed-out again in an instant. I didn't even pause atthe ornately carved double doors to catch my breath before finding out what Alice had done. I just burstthrough, intenton wearing the first things I touched. I should have known it wouldn't be that easy.　　"Which ones are mine?" I hissed. As promised, the room was bigger than our bedroom. It might havebeen bigger than the rest of the house put together, but I'd have to pace it off to be positive. I had a briefmental flash of Alice trying to persuade Esme to ignore classic proportions and allow this monstrosity. Iwondered how Alice had won that one.　　Everything was wrapped in garment bags, pristine and white, row after row after row.　　"To the best of my knowledge, everything but this rack here"—he touched a bar that stretched along thehalf-wall to the left of the door—"is yours.""All of this?"He shrugged.　　"Alice," we said together. He said her name like an explanation; I said it like an expletive.　　"Fine," I muttered, and I pulled down the zipper on the closest bag. I growled under my breath when Isaw the floorlength silk gown inside—baby pink.　　Finding something normal to wear could take all day!　　"Let me help," Edward offered. He sniffed carefully at the air and then followed some scent to the backof the long room. There was a built-in dresser there. He sniffed again, then opened a drawer. With atriumphant grin, he held out a pair of artfully faded blue jeans.　　I flitted to his side. "How did you do that?""Denim has its own scent just like anything else. Now... stretch cotton?"He followed his nose to a half-rack, unearthing a long-sleeved white t-shirt. He tossed it to me.　　"Thanks," I said fervently. I inhaled each fabric, memorizing the scent for future searches through thismadhouse. I remembered silk and satin; I would avoid those.　　It only took him seconds to find his own clothes—if I hadn't seen him undressed, I would have swornthere was nothing more beautiful than Edward in his khakis and pale beige pullover—and then he tookmy hand. We darted through the hidden garden, leaped lightly over the stone wall, and hit the forest at adead sprint. I pulled my hand free so that we could race back. He beat me this time.　　Renesmee was awake; she was sitting up on the floor with Rose and Emmett hovering over her, playingwith a little pile of twisted silverware. She had a mangled spoon in her right hand. As soon as she spiedme through the glass, she chucked the spoon on the floor—where it left a divot in the wood—andpointed in my direction imperiously. Her audience laughed; Alice, Jasper, Esme, and Carlisle were sittingon the couch, watching her as if she were the most engrossing film.　　I was through the door before their laughter had barely begun, bounding across the room and scoopingher up from the floor in the same second. We smiled widely at each other.　　She was different, but not so much. A little longer again, her proportions drifting from babyish tochildlike. Her hair was longer by a quarter inch, the curls bouncing like springs with every movement. I'dlet my imagination run wildon the trip back, and I'd imagined worse than this. Thanks to my overdone fears, these little changeswere almost a relief. Even without Carlisle's measurements, I was sure the changes were slower thanyesterday.　　Renesmee patted my cheek. I winced. She was hungry again.　　"How long has she been up?" I asked as Edward disappeared through the kitchen doorway. I was surehe was on his way to get her breakfast, having seen what she'd just thought as clearly as I had. Iwondered if he would ever have noticed her little quirk, if he'd been the only one to know her. To him, itprobably would have seemed like hearing anyone.　　"Just a few minutes," Rose said. "We would have called you soon. She's been asking for you—demandingmight be a better description. Esme sacrificed her second-best silver service to keep the littlemonster entertained." Rose smiled at Renesmee with so much gloating affection that the criticism wasentirely weightless. "We didn't want to... er, bother you."Rosalie bit her lip and looked away, trying not to laugh. I could feel Emmett's silent laughter behind me,sending vibrations through the foundations of the house.　　I kept my chin high. "We'll get your room set up right away," I said to Renesmee. "You'll like thecottage. It's magic." I look up at Esme. "Thank you, Esme. So much. It's absolutely perfect."Before Esme could respond, Emmett was laughing again—it wasn't silent this time.　　"So it's still standing?" he managed to get out between his snickers. "I would've thought you two hadknocked it to rubble by now. What were you doing last night? Discussing the national debt?" He howledwith laughter.　　I gritted my teeth and reminded myself of the negative consequences when I'd let my temper get awayfrom me yesterday. Of course, Emmett wasn't as breakable as Seth___Thinking of Seth made me wonder. "Where're the wolves today?" I glanced out the window wall, butthere had been no sign of Leah on the way in.　　"Jacob took off this morning pretty early," Rosalie told me, a little frown creasing her forehead. "Sethfollowed him out.""What was he so upset about?" Edward asked as he came back into the room with Renesmee's cup.　　There must have been more in Rosalie's memory than I'd seen in her expression.　　Without breathing, I handed Renesmee off to Rosalie. Super-self-control, maybe, but there was no wayI was going to be able to feed her. Not yet.　　"I don't know—or care," Rosalie grumbled, but she answered Edward's question more fully. "He waswatching Nessie sleep, his mouth hanging open like the moron he is, and then he just jumped to his feetwithout any kind of trigger—that I noticed, anyway—and stormed out. / was glad to be rid of him. Themore time he spends here, the less chance there is that we'll ever get the smell out.""Rose," Esme chided gently.　　Rosalie flipped her hair. "I suppose it doesn't matter. We won't be here that much longer.""I still say we should go straight to New Hampshire and get things set up," Emmett said, obviouslycontinuing anearlier conversation. "Bella's already registered at Dartmouth. Doesn't look like it will take her all thatlong to be able to handle school." He turned to look at me with a teasing grin. Tm sure you'll ace yourclasses... apparently there's nothing interesting for you to do at night besides study."Rosalie giggled.　　Do not lose your temper, do not lose your temper,I chanted to myself. And then I was proud of myselffor keeping my head.　　So I was pretty surprised that Edward didn't.　　He growled—an abrupt, shocking rasp of sound—and the blackest fury rolled across his expression likestorm clouds.　　Before any of us could respond, Alice was on her feet.　　"What is he doing? What is that dog doing that has erased my schedule for the entire day? I can't seeanything] No!" She shot me a tortured glance. "Look at you! You neec/meto show you how to use yourcloset."For one second I was grateful for whatever Jacob was up to.　　And then Edward's hands balled up into fists and he snarled, "He talked to Charlie. He thinks Charlie isfollowing after him. Coming here. Today."Alice said a word that sounded very odd in her trilling, ladylike voice, and then she blurred into motion,streaking out the backdoor.　　"He told Charlie?" I gasped. "But—doesn't he understand? How could he do that?" Charlie couldn'tknow about me! About vampires! That would put him on a hit list that even the Cullens couldn't save himfrom. "No!"Edward spoke through his teeth. "Jacob's on his way in now."It must have started raining farther east. Jacob came through the door shaking his wet hair like a dog,flipping droplets on the carpet and the couch where they made little round gray spots on the white. Histeeth glinted against his dark lips; his eyes were bright and excited. He walked with jerky movements,like he was all hyped-up about destroying my father's life.　　"Hey, guys," he greeted us, grinning.　　It was perfectly silent.　　Leah and Seth slipped in behind him, in their human forms—for now; both of their hands were tremblingwith the tension in the room.　　"Rose," I said, holding my arms out. Wordlessly, Rosalie handed me Renesmee. I pressed her close tomy motionless heart, holding her like a talisman against rash behavior. I would keep her in my arms until Iwas sure my decision to kill Jacob was based entirely on rational judgment rather than fury.　　She was very still, watching and listening. How much did she understand?　　"Charlie'll be here soon," Jacob said to me casually. "Just a heads-up. I assume Alice is getting yousunglasses or something?""You assume way too much," I spit through my teeth. "What. Have. You. Done?"Jacob's smile wavered, but he was still too wound up to answer seriously. "Biondie and Emmett wokeme up this morning going on and on about you all moving cross-country. Like I could let you leave.　　Charlie was the biggest issue there, right? Well, problem solved.'7"Do you even realize what you've done? The danger you've put him in?"He snorted. "I didn't put him in danger. Except from you. But you've got some kind of supernaturalself-control, right? Not as good as mind reading, if you ask me. Much less exciting."Edward moved then, darting across the room to get in Jacob's face. Though he was half a head shorterthan Jacob, Jacob leaned away from his staggering anger as if Edward towered over him.　　"That's just a theory, mongrel," he snarled. "You think we should test it out on Charlie? Did youconsider the physical pain you're putting Bella through, even if she can resist? Or the emotional pain if shedoesn't? I suppose what happens to Bella no longer concerns you!" He spit the last word.　　Renesmee pressed her fingers anxiously to my cheek, anxiety coloring the replay in her head.　　Edward's words finally cut through Jacob's strangely electric mood. His mouth dropped into a frown.　　"Bella will be in pain?""Like you've shoved a white-hot branding iron down her throat!"I flinched, remembering the scent of pure human blood.　　"I didn't know that," Jacob whispered.　　"Then perhaps you should have asked first," Edward growled back through his teeth.　　"You would have stopped me.""You should have been stopped—""This isn't about me," I interrupted. I stood very still, keeping my hold on Renesmee and sanity. "This isabout Charlie, Jacob. How could you put him in danger this way? Do you realize it's death or vampire lifefor him now, too?" My voice trembled with the tears my eyes could no longer shed.　　Jacob was still troubled by Edward's accusations, but mine didn't seem to bother him. "Relax, Bella. Ididn't tell him anything you weren't planning to tell him.""But he's coming here!""Yeah, that's the idea. Wasn't the whole let him make the wrong assumptions' thing your plan? I think Iprovided a very nice red herring, if I do say so myself."My fingers flexed away from Renesmee. I curled them back in securely. "Say it straight, Jacob. I don'thave the patience for this.""I didn't tell him anything about you, Bella. Not really. I told him about me. Well, show is probably abetter verb.""He phased in front of Charlie," Edward hissed.　　I whispered, "You what?""He's brave. Brave as you are. Didn't pass out or throw up or anything. I gotta say, I was impressed.　　You should've seen his face when I started taking my clothes off, though. Priceless," Jacob chortled.　　"You absolute moronl You could have given him a heart attack!""Charlie's fine. He's tough. If you'd give this just a minute, you'll see that I did you a favor here.""You have half of that, Jacob." My voice was flat and steely. "You have thirty seconds to tell me everysingle word before I give Renesmee to Rosalie and rip your miserable head off. Seth won't be able tostop me this time.""Jeez, Bells. You didn't used to be so melodramatic. Is that a vampire thing?""Twenty-six seconds."Jacob rolled his eyes and flopped into the nearest chair. His little pack moved to stand on his flanks, notat all relaxed the way he seemed to be; Leah's eyes were on me, her teeth slightly bared.　　"So I knocked on Charlie's door this morning and asked him to come for a walk with me. He wasconfused, but when I told him it was about you and that you were back in town, he followed me out tothe woods. I told him you weren't sick anymore, and that things were a little weird, but good. He wasabout to take off to see you, but I told him I had to show him something first. And then I phased." Jacobshrugged.　　My teeth felt like a vise was pushing them together. "I want every word, you monster.""Well, you said I only had thirty seconds—okay, okay." My expression must have convinced him that Iwasn't in the mood for teasing. "Lemme see... I phased back and got dressed, and then after he startedbreathing again, I said something like, 'Charlie, you don't live in the world you thought you lived in. Thegood news is, nothing has changed—except that now you know. Life'll go on the same way it alwayshas. You can go right back to pretending that you don't believe any of this.'　　"It took him a minute to get his head together, and then he wanted to know what was really going onwith you, with the whole rare-disease thing. I told him that you had been sick, but you were fine now—itwas just that you'd had to change a little bit in the process of getting better. He wanted to know what Imeant by 'change,' and I told him that you looked a lot more like Esme now than you looked like Renee."Edward hissed while I stared in horror; this was headed in a dangerous direction.　　"After a few minutes, he asked, real quietly, if you turned into an animal, too. And I said, 'She wishes shewas that cool!'" Jacob chuckled.　　Rosalie made a noise of disgust.　　"I started to tell him more about werewolves, but I didn't even get the whole word out—Charlie cut meoff and said he'd 'rather not know the specifics.' Then he asked if you'd known what you were gettingyourself into when you married Edward, and I said, 'Sure, she's known all about this for years, since shefirst came to Forks.' He didn't like that very much. I let him rant till he got it out of his system. After hegot calmed down, he just wanted two things. He wanted to see you, and I said it would be better if hegave me a head start to explain."I inhaled deeply. "What was the other thing he wanted?"Jacob smiled. "You'll like this. His main request is that he be told as little as possible about all of this. Ifit's not absolutely essential for him to know something, then keep it to yourself. Need to know, only."I felt relief for the first time since Jacob had walked in. "I can handle that part.""Other than that, he'd just like to pretend things are normal." Jacob's smile turned smug; he must suspectthat I would be starting to feel the first faint stirrings of gratitude about now.　　"What did you tell him about Renesmee?" I struggled to maintain the razor edge in my voice, fighting thereluctant appreciation. It was premature. There was still so much wrong with this situation. Even ifJacob's intervention had brought out a better reaction in Charlie than I'd ever hoped for...　　"Oh yeah. So I told him that you and Edward had inherited a new little mouth to feed." He glanced atEdward. "She's your orphaned ward—like Bruce Wayne and Dick Grayson." Jacob snorted. "I didn'tthink you'd mind me lying. That's all part of the game, right?" Edward didn't respond in any way, soJacob went on. "Charlie was way past being shocked at this point, but he did ask if you were adoptingher. 'Like a daughter? Like I'm sort of a grandfather?' were his exact words. I told him yes. 'Congrats,Gramps,' and all of that. He even smiled a little."The stinging returned to my eyes, but not out of fear or anguish this time. Charlie was smiling at the ideaof being a grandpa? Charlie would meet Renesmee?　　"But she's changing so fast," I whispered.　　"I told him that she was more special than all of us put together," Jacob said in a soft voice. He stoodand walked right up to me, waving Leah and Seth off when they started to follow. Renesmee reached outto him, but I hugged her more tightly to me. "I told him, Trust me, you don't want to know about this. Butif you can ignore all the strange parts, you're going to be amazed. She's the most wonderful person in thewhole world.' And then I told him that if he could deal with that, you all would stick around for a whileand he would have a chance to get to know her. But that if it was too much for him, you would leave. Hesaid as long as no one forced too much information on him, he'd deal."Jacob stared at me with half a smile, waiting.　　"I'm not going to say thank you," I told him. "You're still putting Charlie at a huge risk.""I am sorry about it hurting you. I didn't know it was like that. Bella, things are different with us now, butyou'll always be my best friend, and I'll always love you. But I'll love you the right way now. There'sfinally a balance. We both have people we can't live without."He smiled his very most Jacob-y smile. "Still friends?"Try as hard as I could to resist, I had to smile back. Just a tiny smile.　　He held out his hand: an offer.　　I took a deep breath and shifted Renesmee's weight to one arm. I put my left hand in his—he didn't evenflinch at the feel of my cool skin. "If I don't kill Charlie tonight, I'll consider forgiving you for this.""Whenyou don't kill Charlie tonight, you'll owe me huge."I rolled my eyes.　　He held out his other hand toward Renesmee, a request this time. "Can I?""I'm actually holding her so that my hands aren't free to kill you, Jacob. Maybe later."He sighed but didn't push me on it. Wise of him.　　Alice raced back through the door then, her hands full and her expression promising violence.　　"You, you, and you," she snapped, glaring at the werewolves. "If you must stay, get over in the cornerand commit to being there for a while. I need to see. Bella, you'd better give him the baby, too. You'llneed your arms free, anyway."Jacob grinned in triumph.　　Undiluted fear ripped through my stomach as the enormity of what I was about to do hit me. I was goingto gamble on my iffy self-control with my pure human father as the guinea pig. Edward's earlier wordscrashed in my ears again.　　Did you consider the physical pain you're putting Bella through, even if she can resist? Or the emotionalpain if she doesn't?　　I couldn't imagine the pain of failure. My breathing turned to gasps.　　"Take her," I whispered, sliding Renesmee into Jacob's arms.　　He nodded, concern wrinkling his forehead. He gestured to the others, and they all went to the farcorner of the room. Seth and Jake slouched on the floor at once, but Leah shook her head and pursedher lips.　　"Am I allowed to leave?" she griped. She looked uncomfortable in her human body, wearing the samedirty t-shirt and cotton shorts she'd worn to shriek at me the other day, her short hair sticking up inirregular tufts. Her hands were still shaking.　　"Of course," Jake said.　　"Stay east so you don't cross Charlie's path," Alice added.　　Leah didn't look at Alice; she ducked out the back door and stomped into the bushes to phase.　　Edward was back at my side, stroking my face. "You can do this. I know you can. Ill help you; we allwill."I met Edward's eyes with panic screaming from my face. Was he strong enough to stop me if I made awrong move?　　"If I didn't believe you could handle it, we'd disappear today. This very minute. But you can. And you'llbe happier if you can have Charlie in your life."I tried to slow my breathing.　　Alice held out her hand. There was a small white box on her palm. "These will irritate your eyes—theywon't hurt, but they'll cloud your vision. It's annoying. They also won't match your old color, but it's stillbetter than bright red, right?"She flipped the contact box into the air and I caught it.　　"When did you—""Before you left on the honeymoon. I was prepared for several possible futures."I nodded and opened the container. I'd never worn contacts before, but it couldn't be that hard. I tookthe little brown quarter-sphere and pressed it, concave side in, to my eye.　　I blinked, and a film interrupted my sight. I could see through it, of course, but I could also see thetexture of thethin screen. My eye kept focusing on the microscopic scratches and warped sections.　　"I see what you mean," I murmured as I stuck the other one in. I tried to not blink this time. My eyeautomatically wanted to dislodge the obstruction.　　"How do I look?"Edward smiled. "Gorgeous. Of course—""Yes, yes, she always looks gorgeous," Alice finished his thought impatiently. "It's better than red, butthat's the highest commendation I can give. Muddy brown. Your brown was much prettier. Keep in mindthat those won't last forever—the venom in your eyes will dissolve them in a few hours. So if Charliestays longer than that, you'll have to excuse yourself to replace them. Which is a good idea anyway,because humans need bathroom breaks." She shook her head. "Esme, give her a few pointers on actinghuman while I stock the powder room with contacts.""How long do I have?""Charlie will be here in five minutes. Keep it simple."Esme nodded once and came to take my hand. "The main thing is not to sit too still or move too fast,"she told me.　　"Sit down if he does," Emmett interjected. "Humans don't like to just stand there.""Let your eyes wander every thirty seconds or so," Jasper added. "Humans don't stare at one thing fortoo long.""Cross your legs for about five minutes, then switch to crossing your ankles for the next five," Rosaliesaid.　　I nodded once at each suggestion. I'd noticed them doing some of these things yesterday. I thought Icould mimic their actions.　　"And blink at least three times a minute," Emmett said. He frowned, then darted to where the televisionremote sat on the end table. He flipped the TV on to a college football game and nodded to himself.　　"Move your hands, too. Brush your hair back or pretend to scratch something," Jasper said.　　"I said Esme" Alice complained as she returned. "You'll overwhelm her.""No, I think I got it all," I said. "Sit, look around, blink, fidget.""Right," Esme approved. She hugged my shoulders.　　Jasper frowned. "You'll be holding your breath as much as possible, but you need to move yourshoulders a little to make it /oo/clike you're breathing."I inhaled once and then nodded again.　　Edward hugged me on my free side. "You can do this," he repeated, murmuring the encouragement inmy ear.　　"Two minutes," Alice said. "Maybe you should start out already on the couch. You've been sick, afterall. That way he won't have to see you move right at first."Alice pulled me to the sofa. I tried to move slowly, to make my limbs more clumsy. She rolled her eyes,so I must not have been doing a good job.　　"Jacob, I need Renesmee," I said.　　Jacob frowned, unmoving.　　Alice shook her head. "Bella, that doesn't help me see.""But I need her. She keeps me calm.'7The edge of panic in my voice was unmistakable.　　"Fine," Alice groaned. "Hold her as still as you can and I'll try to see around her." She sighed wearily,like she'd been asked to work overtime on a holiday. Jacob sighed, too, but brought Renesmee to me,and then retreated quickly from Alice's glare.　　Edward took a seat beside me and put his arms around Renesmee and me. He leaned forward andlooked Renesmee very seriously in the eyes.　　"Renesmee, someone special is coming to see you and your mother," he said in a solemn voice, as if heexpected her to understand every word. Did she? She looked back at him with clear, grave eyes. "Buthe's not like us, or even like Jacob. We have to be very careful with him. You shouldn't tell him things theway you tell us."Renesmee touched his face.　　"Exactly," he said. "And he's going to make you thirsty. But you mustn't bite him. He won't heal likeJacob.""Can she understand you?" I whispered.　　"She understands. You'll be careful, won't you, Renesmee? You'll help us?"Renesmee touched him again.　　"No, I don't care if you bite Jacob. That's fine."Jacob chuckled.　　"Maybe you should leave, Jacob," Edward said coldly, glaring in his direction. Edward hadn't forgivenJacob, because he knew that no matter what happened now, I was going to be hurting. But I'd take theburn happily if that were the worst thing I'd face tonight.　　"I told Charlie I'd be here," Jacob said. "He needs the moral support.""Moral support," Edward scoffed. "As far as Charlie knows, you're the most repulsive monster of us all.""Repulsive?" Jake protested, and then he laughed quietly to himself.　　I heard the tires turn off the highway onto the quiet, damp earth of the Cullens' drive, and my breathingspiked again. My heart ought to have been hammering. It made me anxious that my body didn't have theright reactions.　　I concentrated on the steady thrumming of Renesmee's heart to calm myself. It worked pretty quickly.　　"Well done, Bella," Jasper whispered in approval.　　Edward tightened his arm over my shoulders.　　"You're sure?" I asked him.　　"Positive. You can do anything" He smiled and kissed me.　　It wasn't precisely a peck on the lips, and my wild vampiric reactions took me off guard yet again.　　Edward's lips were like a shot of some addictive chemical straight into my nervous system. I was instantlycraving more. It took all my concentration to remember the baby in my arms.　　Jasper felt my mood change. "Er, Edward, you might not want to distract her like that right now. Sheneeds to beable to focus."Edward pulled away. "Oops," he said.　　I laughed. That had been my line from the very beginning, from the very first kiss.　　"Later," I said, and anticipation curled my stomach into a ball.　　"Focus, Bella," Jasper urged.　　"Right." i pushed the trembly feelings away. Charlie, that was the main thing now. Keep Charlie safetoday. We would have all night___"Bella.""Sorry, Jasper."Emmett laughed.　　The sound of Charlie's cruiser got closer and closer. The second of levity passed, and everyone was still.　　I crossed my legs and practiced my blinks.　　The car pulled in front of the house and idled for a few seconds. I wondered if Charlie was as nervousas I was. Then the engine cut off, and a door slammed. Three steps across the grass, and then eightechoing thuds against the wooden stairs. Four more echoing footsteps across the porch. Then silence.　　Charlie took two deep breaths.　　Knock, knock, knock.　　I inhaled for what might be the last time. Renesmee nestled deeper into my arms, hiding her face in myhair.　　Carlisle answered the door. His stressed expression changed to one of welcome, like switching thechannel on the TV.　　"Hello, Charlie," he said, looking appropriately abashed. After all, we were supposed to be in Atlanta atthe Center for Disease Control. Charlie knew he'd been lied to.　　"Carlisle," Charlie greeted him stiffly. "Where's Bella?""Right here, Dad."Ugh! My voice was so wrong. Plus, I'd used up some of my air supply. I gulped in a quick refill, gladthat Charlie's scent had not saturated the room yet.　　Charlie's blank expression told me how off my voice was. His eyes zeroed in on me and widened.　　I read the emotions as they scrolled across his face.　　Shock. Disbelief. Pain. Loss. Fear. Anger. Suspicion. More pain.　　I bit my lip. It felt funny. My new teeth were sharper against my granite skin than my human teeth hadbeen against my soft human lips.　　"Is that you, Bella?" he whispered.　　"Yep." I winced at my wind-chime voice. "Hi, Dad."He took a deep breath to steady himself.　　"Hey, Charlie," Jacob greeted him from the corner. "How're things?"Charlie glowered at Jacob once, shuddered at a memory, and then stared at me again.　　Slowly, Charlie walked across the room until he was a few feet away from me. He darted an accusingglare at Edward, and then his eyes flickered back to me. The warmth of his body heat beat against mewith each pulse of his heart.　　"Bella?" heasked again.　　I spoke in a lower voice, trying to keep the ring out of it."It's really me."His jaw locked.　　"I'm sorry, Dad," I said.　　"Are you okay?" he demanded.　　"Really and truly great," I promised. "Healthy as a horse."That was it for my oxygen.　　"Jake told me this was... necessary. That you were dying." He said the words like he didn't believe themone bit.　　I steeled myself, focused on Renesmee's warm weight, leaned into Edward for support, and took a deepbreath.　　Charlie's scent was a fistful of flames, punching straight down my throat. But it was so much more thanpain. It was a hot stabbing of desire, too. Charlie smelled more delicious than anything I'd ever imagined.　　As appealing as the anonymous hikers had been on the hunt, Charlie was doubly tempting. And he wasjust a few feet away, leaking mouthwatering heat and moisture into the dry air.　　But I wasn't hunting now. And this was my father.　　Edward squeezed my shoulders sympathetically, and Jacob shot an apologetic glance at me across theroom.　　I tried to collect myself and ignore the pain and longing of the thirst. Charlie was waiting for my answer.　　"Jacob was telling you the truth.""That makes one of you," Charlie growled.　　I hoped Charlie could see past the changes in my new face to read the remorse there.　　Under my hair, Renesmee sniffed as Charlie's scent registered with her, too. I tightened my grip on her.　　Charlie saw my anxious glance down and followed it. "Oh," he said, and all the anger fell off his face,leaving only shock behind. "This is her. The orphan Jacob said you're adopting.""My niece," Edward lied smoothly. He must have decided that the resemblance between Renesmee andhim was too pronounced to be ignored. Best to claim they were related from the beginning.　　"I thought you'd lost your family," Charlie said, accusation returning to his voice.　　"I lost my parents. My older brother was adopted, like me. I never saw him after that. But the courtslocated me when he and his wife died in a car accident, leaving their only child without any other family."Edward was so good at this. His voice was even, with just the right amount of innocence. I neededpractice so that I could do that.　　Renesmee peeked out from under my hair, sniffing again. She glanced shyly at Charlie from under herlong lashes, then hid again.　　"She's... she's,well, she's a beauty.""Yes," Edward agreed.　　"Kind of a big responsibility, though. You two are just getting started.""What else could we do?" Edward brushed his fingers lightly over her cheek. I saw him touch her lips forjust a moment—a reminder. "Would you have refused her?""Hmph. Well." Heshook his head absently. "Jake says you call her Nessie?""No, we don't," I said, my voice too sharp and piercing. "Her name is Renesmee."Charlie refocused on me. "How do you feel about this? Maybe Carlisle and Esme could—""She's mine," I interrupted. "I want her."Charlie frowned. "You gonna make me a grandpa so young?"Edward smiled. "Carlisle is a grandfather, too."Charlie shot an incredulous glance at Carlisle, still standing by the front door; he looked like Zeus'syounger, better-looking brother.　　Charlie snorted and then laughed. "I guess that does sort of make me feel better."His eyes strayed backto Renesmee. "She sure is something to look at." His warm breath blew lightly across the space betweenus.　　Renesmee leaned toward the smell, shaking off my hair and looking him full in the face for the first time.　　Charlie gasped.　　I knew what he was seeing. My eyes—his eyes—copied exactly into her perfect face.　　Charlie started hyperventilating. His lips trembled, and I could read the numbers he mouthed. He wascounting backward, trying to fit nine months into one. Trying to put it together but not able to force theevidence right in front of him to make any sense.　　Jacob got up and came over to pat Charlie on the back. He leaned in to whisper something in Charlie'sear; only Charlie didn't know we could all hear.　　"Need to know, Charlie. It's okay. I promise."Charlie swallowed and nodded. And then his eyes blazed as he took a step closer to Edward with hisfists tightly clenched.　　"I don't want to know everything, but I'm done with the lies!""I'm sorry," Edward said calmly, "but you need to know the public story more than you need to knowthe truth. If you're going to be part of this secret, the public story is the one that counts. It's to protectBella and Renesmee as well as the rest of us. Can you go along with the lies for them?"The room wasfull of statues. I crossed my ankles.　　Charlie huffed once and then turned his glare on me. "You might've given me some warning, kid.""Would it really have made this any easier?"He frowned, and then he knelt on the floor in front of me. I could see the movement of the blood in hisneck under his skin. I could feel the warm vibration of it.　　So could Renesmee. She smiled and reached one pink palm out to him. I held her back. She pushed herotherhand against my neck, thirst, curiosity, and Charlie's face in her thoughts. There was a subtle edge to themessage that made me think that she'd understood Edward's words perfectly; she acknowledged thirst,but overrode it in the same thought.　　"Whoa," Charlie gasped, his eyes on her perfect teeth. "How old is she?""Urn...""Three months," Edward said, and then added slowly, "rather, she's the size of a three-month-old, moreor less. She's younger in some ways, more mature in others."Very deliberately, Renesmee waved at him.　　Charlie blinked spastically.　　Jacob elbowed him. "Told you she was special, didn't I?"Charlie cringed away from the contact.　　"Oh, c'mon, Charlie," Jacob groaned. "I'm the same person I've always been. Just pretend this afternoondidn't happen."The reminder made Charlie's lips go white, but he nodded once. "Just what is your part in all this, Jake?"he asked. "How much does Billy know? Why are you here?" He looked at Jacob's face, which wasglowing as he stared at Renesmee.　　"Well, I could tell you all about it—Billy knows absolutely everything—but it involves a lot of stuff aboutwerewo—""Ungh!" Charlie protested, covering his ears. "Never mind."Jacob grinned. "Everything's going to be great, Charlie. Just try to not believe anything you see."My dad mumbled something unintelligible.　　"Woo!" Emmett suddenly boomed in his deep bass. "Go Gators!"Jacob and Charlie jumped. The rest of us froze.　　Charlie recovered, then looked at Emmett over his shoulder. "Florida winning?""Just scored the first touchdown," Emmett confirmed. He shot a look in my direction, wagging hiseyebrows like a villain in vaudeville. "'Bout time somebody scored around here."I fought back a hiss. In front of Charlie? That was over the line.　　But Charlie was beyond noticing innuendos. He took yet another deep breath, sucking the air in like hewas trying to pull it down to his toes. I envied him. He lurched to his feet, stepped around Jacob, andhalf-fell into an open chair. "Well," he sighed, "I guess we should see if they can hold on to the lead."
    Chapter 26 Shiny
    "I don't know how much we should tell Renee about this," Charlie said, hesitating with one foot out thedoor. He stretched, and then his stomach growled.　　I nodded. "I know, i don't want to freak her out. Better to protect her. This stuff isn't for thefainthearted."His lips twisted up to the side ruefully. "I would have tried to protect you, too, if I'd known how. But Iguess you've never fit into the fainthearted category, have you?"I smiled back, pulling a blazing breath in through my teeth.　　Charlie patted his stomach absently. "I'll think of something. We've got time to discuss this, right?""Right," I promised him.　　It had been a long day in some ways, and so short in others. Charlie was late for dinner—SueClearwater was cooking for him and Billy. That was going to be an awkward evening, but at least he'dbe eating real food; I was glad someone was trying to keep him from starving due to his lack of cookingability.　　All day the tension had made the minutes pass slowly; Charlie had never relaxed the stiff set of hisshoulders. But he'd been in no hurry to leave, either. He'd watched two whole games—thankfully soabsorbed in his thoughts that he was totally oblivious to Emmett's suggestive jokes that got more pointedand less football-related with each aside—and the after-game commentaries, and then the news, notmoving until Seth had reminded him of the time.　　"You gonna stand Billy and my mom up, Charlie? C'mon. Bella and Nessie'll be here tomorrow. Let'sget some grub, eh?"It had been clear in Charlie's eyes that he hadn't trusted Seth's assessment, but he'd let Seth lead the wayout. The doubt was still there as he paused now. The clouds were thinning, the rain gone. The sun mighteven make an appearance just in time to set.　　"Jake says you guys were going to take off on me," he muttered to me now.　　"I didn't want to do that if there was any way at all around it. That's why we're still here.""He said you could stay for a while, but only if I'm tough enough, and if I can keep my mouth shut.""Yes... but I can't promise that we'll never leave, Dad. It's pretty complicated___""Need to know," he reminded me.　　"Right.""You'll visit, though, if you have to go?""I promise, Dad. Now that you know/usf enough, I think this can work. I'll keep as close as you want."He chewed on his lip for half a second, then leaned slowly toward me with his arms cautiously extended.　　I shifted Renesmee—napping now—to my left arm, locked my teeth, held my breath, and wrapped myright arm very lightly around his warm, soft waist.　　"Keep real close, Bells," he mumbled. "Real close.""Love you, Dad," I whispered through my teeth.　　He shivered and pulled away. I dropped my arm.　　"Love you, too, kid. Whatever else has changed, that hasn't." He touched one finger to Renesmee's pinkcheek. "She sure looks a lot like you."I kept my expression casual, though I felt anything but. "More like Edward, I think." I hesitated, and thenadded, "She has your curls."Charlie started, then snorted. "Huh. Guess she does. Huh. Grandpa." He shook his head doubtfully. "DoI ever get to hold her?"I blinked in shock and then composed myself. After considering for a half second and judgingRenesmee's appearance—she looked completely out—I decided that I might as well push my luck to thelimit, since things were going so well today___"Here," I said, holding her out to him. He automatically made an awkward cradle with his arms, and Itucked Renesmee into it. His skin wasn't quite as hot as hers, but it made my throat tickle to feel thewarmth flowing under the thin membrane. Where my white skin brushed him it left goose bumps. I wasn'tsure if this was a reaction to my new temperature or totally psychological.　　Charlie grunted quietly as he felt her weight. "She's... sturdy."I frowned. She felt feather-light to me. Maybe my measure was off.　　"Sturdy is good," Charlie said, seeing my expression. Then he muttered to himself, "She'll need to betough, surrounded by all this craziness." He bounced his arms gently, swaying a little from side to side.　　"Prettiest baby I ever saw, including you, kid. Sorry, but it's true.""I know it is.""Pretty baby," he said again, but it was closer to a coo this time.　　I could see it in his face—I could watch it growing there. Charlie was just as helpless against her magicas the rest of us. Two seconds in his arms, and already she owned him.　　"Can I come back tomorrow?""Sure, Dad. Of course. We'll be here.""You'd better be," he said sternly, but his face was soft, still gazing at Renesmee. "See you tomorrow,Nessie.""Not you, too!""Huh?""Her name is Renesmee. Like Renee and Esme, put together. No variations." I struggled to calm myselfwithout the deep breath this time. "Do you want to hear her middle name?""Sure.""Carlie. With a C. Like Carlisle and Charlie put together."Charlie's eye-creasing grin lit up his face, taking me off guard. "Thanks, Bells.""Thank you, Dad. So much has changed so quickly. My head hasn't stopped spinning. If I didn't haveyou now, I don't know how I'd keep my grip on—on reality." I'd been about to say my grip on who Iwas. That was probably more than he needed.　　Charlie's stomach growled.　　"Go eat, Dad. We will be here." I remembered how it felt, that first uncomfortable immersion in fantasy—the sensation that everything would disappear in the light of the rising sun.　　Charlie nodded and then reluctantly returned Renesmee to me. He glanced past me into the house; hiseyes were a little wild for a minute as he stared around the big bright room. Everyone was still there,besides Jacob, who I could hear raiding the refrigerator in the kitchen; Alice was lounging on the bottomstep of the staircase with Jasper's head in her lap; Carlisle had his head bent over a fat book in his lap;Esme was humming to herself, sketching on a notepad, while Rosalie and Emmett laid out the foundationfor a monumental house of cards under the stairs; Edward had drifted to his piano and was playing verysoftly to himself. There was no evidence that the day was coming to a close, that it might be time to eat orshift activities in preparation for evening. Something intangible had changed in the atmosphere. TheCullens weren't trying as hard as they usually did—the human charade had slipped ever so slightly,enough for Charlie to feel the difference.　　He shuddered, shook his head, and sighed. "See you tomorrow, Bella." He frowned and then added, "Imean, it's not like you don't look... good. I'll get used to it.""Thanks, Dad."Charlie nodded and walked thoughtfully toward his car. I watched him drive away; it wasn't until I heardhis tires hit the freeway that I realized I'd done it. I'd actually made it through the whole day withouthurting Charlie. All by myself. I must have a superpower!　　It seemed too good to be true. Could I really have both my new family and some of my old as well?　　And I'd thought that yesterday had been perfect.　　"Wow," I whispered. I blinked and felt the third set of contact lenses disintegrate.　　The sound of the piano cut off, and Edward's arms were around my waist, his chin resting on myshoulder.　　"You took the word right out of my mouth.""Edward, i did it!""You did. You were unbelievable. All that worrying over being a newborn, and then you skip italtogether.'7He laughed quietly.　　"I'm not even sure she's really a vampire, let alone a newborn," Emmett called from under the stairs.　　"She's too tame."All the embarrassing comments he'd made in front of my father sounded in my ears again, and it wasprobably a good thing I was holding Renesmee. Unable to help my reaction entirely, I snarled under mybreath.　　"Oooo, scary," Emmett laughed.　　I hissed, and Renesmee stirred in my arms. She blinked a few times, then looked around, her expressionconfused. She sniffed, then reached for my face.　　"Charlie will be back tomorrow," I assured her.　　"Excellent," Emmett said. Rosalie laughed with him this time.　　"Not brilliant, Emmett," Edward said scornfully, holding out his hands to take Renesmee from me. Hewinked when I hesitated, and so, a little confused, I gave her to him.　　"What do you mean?" Emmett demanded.　　"It's a little dense, don't you think, to antagonize the strongest vampire in the house?"Emmett threw his head back and snorted. "Please!""Bella," Edward murmured to me while Emmett listened closely, "do you remember a few months ago, Iasked you to do me a favor once you were immortal?"That rang a dim bell. I sifted through the blurry human conversations. After a moment, I rememberedand I gasped, "Oh!"Alice trilled a long, pealing laugh. Jacob poked his head around the corner, his mouth stuffed with food.　　"What?" Emmett growled.　　"Really?" I asked Edward.　　"Trust me," he said.　　I took a deep breath. "Emmett, how do you feel about a little bet?"He was on his feet at once. "Awesome. Bring it."I bit my lip for a second. He was just so huge.　　"Unless you're too afraid... ?" Emmett suggested.　　I squared my shoulders. "You. Me. Arm-wrestling. Dining room table. Now."Emmett's grin stretched across his face.　　"Er, Bella," Alice said quickly, "I think Esme is fairly fond of that table. It's an antique.""Thanks," Esme mouthed at her.　　"No problem," Emmett said with a gleaming smile. "Right this way, Bella."I followed him out the back, toward the garage; I could hear all the others trailing behind. There was alargish granite boulder standing up out of a tumble of rocks near the river, obviously Emmett's goal.　　Though the big rock was a little rounded and irregular, it would do the job.　　Emmett placed his elbow on the rock and waved me forward.　　I was nervous again as I watched the thick muscles in Emmett's arm roll, but I kept my face smooth.　　Edward had promised I would be stronger than anyone for a while. He seemed very confident about this,and I felt strong. That strong? I wondered, looking at Emmett's biceps. I wasn't even two days old,though, and that ought to count for something. Unless nothing was normal about me. Maybe I wasn't asstrong as a normal newborn. Maybe that's why control was so easy for me.　　I tried to look unconcerned as I set my elbow against the stone.　　"Okay, Emmett. I win, and you cannot say one more word about my sex life to anyone, not even Rose.　　No allusions, no innuendos—no nothing."His eyes narrowed. "Deal. I win, and it's going to get a lot worse."He heard my breath stop and grinned evilly. There was no hint of bluff in his eyes.　　"You gonna back down so easy, little sister?" Emmett taunted. "Not much wild about you, is there? I betthat cottage doesn't have a scratch." He laughed. "Did Edward tell you how many houses Rose and Ismashed?"I gritted my teeth and grabbed his big hand. "One, two—""Three," he grunted, and shoved against my hand.　　Nothing happened.　　Oh, I could feel the force he was exerting. My new mind seemed pretty good at all kinds of calculations,and so I could tell that if he wasn't meeting any resistance, his hand would have pounded right through therock without difficulty. The pressure increased, and I wondered randomly if a cement truck doing fortymiles an hour down a sharp decline would have similar power. Fifty miles an hour? Sixty? Probablymore.　　It wasn't enough to move me. His hand shoved against mine with crushing force, but it wasn't unpleasant.　　It felt kind of good in a weird way. I'd been so very careful since the last time I woke up, trying so hardnot to break things. It was a strange relief to use my muscles. To let the strength flow rather thanstruggling to restrain it.　　Emmett grunted; his forehead creased and his whole body strained in one rigid line toward the obstacleof my unmoving hand. I let him sweat—figuratively—for a moment while I enjoyed the sensation of thecrazy force running through my arm.　　A few seconds, though, and I was a little bored with it. I flexed; Emmett lost an inch.　　I laughed. Emmett snarled harshly through his teeth.　　"Just keep your mouth shut," I reminded him, and then I smashed his hand into the boulder. A deafeningcrack echoed off the trees. The rock shuddered, and a piece—about an eighth of the mass—broke off atan invisible fault line and crashed to the ground. It fell on Emmett's foot, and I snickered. I could hearJacob's and Edward's muffled laughter.　　Emmett kicked the rock fragment across the river. It sliced a young maple in half before thudding intothe base of a big fir, which swayed and then fell into another tree.　　"Rematch. Tomorrow.""It's not going to wear off that fast," I told him. "Maybe you ought to give it a month."Emmett growled, flashing his teeth. "Tomorrow.""Hey, whatever makes you happy, big brother."As he turned to stalk away, Emmett punched the granite, shattering off an avalanche of shards andpowder. It was kind of neat, in a childish way.　　Fascinated by the undeniable proof that I was stronger than the strongest vampire I'd ever known, Iplaced my hand, fingers spread wide, against the rock. Then I dug my fingers slowly into the stone,crushing rather than digging; the consistency reminded me of hard cheese. I ended up with a handful ofgravel.　　"Cool," I mumbled.　　With a grin stretching my face, I whirled in a sudden circle and karate-chopped the rock with the side ofmy hand. The stone shrieked and groaned and—with a big poof of dust—split in two.　　I started giggling.　　I didn't pay much attention to the chuckles behind me while I punched and kicked the rest of the boulderinto fragments. I was having too much fun, snickering away the whole time. It wasn't until I heard a newlittle giggle, a high-pitched peal of bells, that I turned away from my silly game.　　"Did she just laugh?"Everyone was staring at Renesmee with the same dumbstruck expression that must have been on myface.　　"Yes," Edward said.　　"Who wasnt laughing?" Jake muttered, rolling his eyes.　　"Tell me you didn't let go a bit on your first run, dog," Edward teased, no antagonism in his voice at all.　　"That's different," Jacob said, and I watched in surprise as he mock-punched Edward's shoulder.　　"Bella's supposed to be a grown-up. Married and a mom and all that. Shouldn't there be more dignity?"Renesmee frowned, and touched Edward's face.　　"What does she want?" I asked.　　"Less dignity," Edward said with a grin. "She was having almost as much fun watching you enjoy yourselfas I was.""Am I funny?" I asked Renesmee, darting back and reaching for her at the same time that she reachedfor me. I took her out of Edward's arms and offered her the shard of rock in my hand. "You want totry?"She smiled her glittering smile and took the stone in both hands. She squeezed, a little dent formingbetween her eyebrows as she concentrated.　　There was a tiny grinding sound, and a bit of dust. She frowned, and held the chunk up to me.　　Til get it," I said, pinching the stone into sand.　　She clapped and laughed; the delicious sound of it made us all join in.　　The sun suddenly burst through the clouds, shooting long beams of ruby and gold across the ten of us,and I was immediately lost in the beauty of my skin in the light of the sunset. Dazed by it.　　Renesmee stroked the smooth diamond-bright facets, then laid her arm next to mine. Her skin had just afaint luminosity, subtle and mysterious. Nothing that would keep her inside on a sunny day like myglowing sparkle. She touched my face, thinking of the difference and feeling disgruntled.　　"You're the prettiest," I assured her.　　Tm not sure I can agree to that," Edward said, and when I turned to answer him, the sunlight on his facestunned me into silence.　　Jacob had his hand in front of his face, pretending to shield his eyes from the glare. "Freaky Bella," hecommented.　　"What an amazing creature she is," Edward murmured, almost in agreement, as if Jacob's comment wasmeant as a compliment. He was both dazzling and dazzled.　　It was a strange feeling—not surprising, I supposed, since everything felt strange now—this being anatural at something. As a human, I'd never been best at anything. I was okay at dealing with Renee, butprobably lots of people could have done better; Phil seemed to be holding his own. I was a goodstudent, but never the top of the class. Obviously, I could be counted out of anything athletic. Not artisticor musical, no particular talents to brag of. Nobody ever gave away a trophy for reading books. Aftereighteen years of mediocrity, I was pretty used to being average. I realized now that I'd long ago given upany aspirations of shining at anything. I just did the best with what I had, never quite fitting into my world.　　So this was really different. I was amazing now—to them and to myself. It was like I had been born tobe a vampire. The idea made me want to laugh, but it also made me want to sing. I had found my trueplace in the world, the place I fit, the place I shined.
    Chapter 27 Travel Plans
    i took mythology a lot more seriously since I'd become a vampire.　　Often, when I looked back over my first three months as an immortal, I imagined how the thread of mylife might look in the Fates' loom—who knew but that it actually existed? I was sure my thread must havechanged color; I thought it had probably started out as a nice beige, something supportive andnon-confrontational, something that would look good in the background. Now it felt like it must be brightcrimson, or maybe glistening gold.　　The tapestry of family and friends that wove together around me was a beautiful, glowing thing, full oftheir bright, complementary colors.　　I was surprised by some of the threads I got to include in my life. The werewolves, with their deep,woodsy colors, were not something I'd expected; Jacob, of course, and Seth, too. But my old friendsQuil and Embry became part of the fabric as they joined Jacob's pack, and even Sam and Emily werecordial. The tensions between our families eased, mostly due to Renesmee. She was easy to love.　　Sue and Leah Clearwater were interlaced into our life, too—two more I had not anticipated.　　Sue seemed to have taken it on herself to smooth Charlie's transition into the world of make-believe.　　She came with him to the Cullens' most days, though she never seemed truly comfortable here the wayher son and most of Jake's pack did. She did not speak often; she just hovered protectively near Charlie.　　She was always the first person he looked to when Renesmee did something disturbingly advanced—which was often. In answer, Sue would eye Seth meaningfully as if to say, Yeah, tell me about it.　　Leah was even less comfortable than Sue and was the only part of our recently extended family whowas openly hostile to the merger. However, she and Jacob had a new camaraderie that kept her close tous all. I asked him about it once—hesitantly; I didn't want to pry, but the relationship was so differentfrom the way it used to be that it made me curious. He shrugged and told me it was a pack thing. Shewas his second-in-command now, his "beta," asI'd called it once long ago.　　"I figured as long as I was going to do this Alpha thing for real," Jacob explained, "I'd better nail downthe formalities."The new responsibility made Leah feel the need to check in with him often, and since he was always withRenesmee...　　Leah was not happy to be near us, but she was the exception. Happiness was the main component in mylife now, the dominant pattern in the tapestry. So much so that my relationship with Jasper was now muchcloser than I'd ever dreamed it would be.　　At first I was really annoyed, though.　　"Yeesh!" I complained to Edward one night after we'd put Renesmee in her wrought-iron crib. "If Ihaven't killed Charlie or Sue yet, it's probably not going to happen. I wish Jasper would stop hovering allthe time!""No one doubts you, Bella, not in the slightest," he assured me. "You know how Jasper is—he can'tresist a good emotional climate. You're so happy all the time, love, he gravitates toward you withoutthinking."And then Edward hugged me tightly, because nothing pleased him more than my overwhelming ecstasyin this new life.　　And I was euphoric the vast majority of the time. The days were not long enough for me to get my fill ofadoring my daughter; the nights did not have enough hours to satisfy my need for Edward.　　There was a flipside to the joy, though. If you turned the fabric of our lives over, I imagined the designon the backside would be woven in the bleak grays of doubt and fear.　　Renesmee spoke her first word when she was exactly one week old. The word was Momma, whichwould have made my day, except that I was so frightened by her progress I could barely force my frozenface to smile back at her. It didn't help that she continued from her first word to her first sentence in thesame breath. "Momma, where is Grandpa?" she'd asked in a clear, high soprano, only bothering to speakaloud because I was across the room from her. She'd already asked Rosalie, using her normal (orseriously abnormal, from another point of view) means of communication. Rosalie hadn't known theanswer, so Renesmee had turned to me.　　When she walked for the first time, fewer than three weeks later, it was similar. She'd simply stared atAlice for a long moment, watching intently as her aunt arranged bouquets in the vases scattered aroundthe room, dancing back and forth across the floor with her arms full of flowers. Renesmee got to her feet,not in the least bit shaky, and crossed the floor almost as gracefully.　　Jacob had burst into applause, because that was clearly the response Renesmee wanted. The way hewas tied to her made his own reactions secondary; his first reflex was always to give Renesmee whatevershe needed. But our eyes met, and I saw all the panic in mine echoed in his. I made my hands claptogether, too, trying to hide my fear from her. Edward applauded quietly at my side, and we didn't needto speak our thoughts to know they were the same.　　Edward and Carlisle threw themselves into research, looking for any answers, anything to expect. Therewasvery little to be found, and none of it verifiable.　　Alice and Rosalie usually began our day with a fashion show. Renesmee never wore the same clothestwice, partly because she outgrew her clothes almost immediately and partly because Alice and Rosaliewere trying to create a baby album that appeared to span years rather than weeks. They took thousandsof pictures, documenting every phase of her accelerated childhood.　　At three months, Renesmee could have been a big one-year-old, or a small two-year-old. She wasn'tshaped exactly like a toddler; she was leaner and more graceful, her proportions were more even, like anadult's. Her bronze ringlets hung to her waist; I couldn't bear to cut them, even if Alice would haveallowed it. Renesmee could speak with flawless grammar and articulation, but she rarely bothered,preferring to simply show people what she wanted. She could not only walk but run and dance. Shecould even read.　　I'd been reading Tennyson to her one night, because the flow and rhythm of his poetry seemed restful. (Ihad to search constantly for new material; Renesmee didn't like repetition in her bedtime stories as otherchildren supposedly did, and she had no patience for picture books.) She reached up to touch my cheek,the image in her mind one of us, only with her holding the book. I gave it to her, smiling.　　" There is sweet music here,'" she read without hesitation, "'that softer falls than petals from blown roseson the grass, or night-dews on still waters between walls of shadowy granite, in a gleaming pass—'"My hand was robotic as I took the book back.　　"If you read, how will you fall asleep?" I asked in a voice that had barely escaped shaking.　　By Carlisle's calculations, the growth of her body was gradually slowing; her mind continued to race onahead. Even if the rate of decrease held steady, she'd still be an adult in no more than four years.　　Four years. And an old woman by fifteen.　　Just fifteen years of life.　　But she was so healthy. Vital, bright, glowing, and happy. Her conspicuous well-being made it easy forme to be happy with her in the moment and leave the future for tomorrow.　　Carlisle and Edward discussed our options for the future from every angle in low voices that I tried notto hear. They never had these discussions when Jacob was around, because there was one sure way tohalt aging, and that wasn't something Jacob was likely to be excited about. I wasn't. Too dangerous! myinstincts screamed at me. Jacob and Renesmee seemed alike in so many ways, both half-and-half beings,two things at the same time. And all the werewolf lore insisted that vampire venom was a death sentencerather than a course to immortality___Carlisle and Edward had exhausted the research they could do from a distance, and now we werepreparing to follow old legends at their source. We were going back to Brazil, starting there. The Ticunashad legends about children like Renesmee.... If other children like her had ever existed, perhaps sometale of the life span of half-mortal children still lingered___The only real question left was exactly when we would go.　　I was the holdup. A small part of it was that I wanted to stay near Forks until after the holidays, forCharlie'ssake. But more than that, there was a different journey that I knew had to come first—that was the clearpriority. Also, it had to be a solo trip.　　This was the only argument that Edward and I had gotten in since I'd become a vampire. The main pointof contention was the "solo" part. But the facts were what they were, and my plan was the only one thatmade rational sense. I had to go see the Volturi, and I had to do it absolutely alone.　　Even freed from old nightmares, from any dreams at all, it was impossible to forget the Volturi. Nor didthey leave us without reminders.　　Until the day that Aro's present showed up, i didn't know that Alice had sent a wedding announcementto the Volturi leaders; we'd been far away on Esme's island when she'd seen a vision of Volturi soldiers—Jane and Alec, the devastatingly powerful twins, among them. Caius was planning to send a huntingparty to see if I was still human, against their edict (because I knew about the secret vampire world, Ieither must join it or be silenced... permanently). So Alice had mailed the announcement, seeing that thiswould delay them as they deciphered the meaning behind it. But they would come eventually. That wascertain.　　The present itself was not overtly threatening. Extravagant, yes, almost frightening in that veryextravagance. The threat was in the parting line of Aro's congratulatory note, written in black ink on asquare of heavy, plain white paper in Aro's own hand:　　I so look forward to seeing the new Mrs. Cullen in person.　　The gift was presented in an ornately carved, ancient wooden box inlaid with gold and mother-of-pearl,ornamented with a rainbow of gemstones. Alice said the box itself was a priceless treasure, that it wouldhave outshone just about any piece of jewelry besides the one inside it.　　"I always wondered where the crown jewels disappeared to after John of England pawned them in thethirteenth century," Carlisle said. "I suppose it doesn't surprise me that the Volturi have their share."The necklace was simple—gold woven into a thick rope of a chain, almost scaled, like a smooth snakethat would curl close around the throat. One jewel hung suspended from the rope; a white diamond thesize of a golf ball.　　The unsubtle reminder in Aro's note interested me more than the jewel. The Volturi needed to see that Iwas immortal, that the Cullens had been obedient to the Volturi's orders, and they needed to see thissoon. They could not be allowed near Forks. There was only one way to keep our life here safe.　　"You're not going alone," Edward had insisted through his teeth, his hands clenching into fists.　　"They won't hurt me," I'd said as soothingly as I could manage, forcing my voice to sound sure. "Theyhave no reason to. I'm a vampire. Case closed.""No. Absolutely no.""Edward, it's the only way to protect her."And he hadn't been able to argue with that. My logic was watertight.　　Even in the short time I'd known Aro, I'd been able to see that he was a collector—and his most prizedtreasures were his living pieces. He coveted beauty, talent, and rarity in his immortal followers more thanany jewel locked in his vaults. It was unfortunate enough that he'd begun to covet Alice's and Edward'sabilities. I would give him no more reason to be jealous of Carlisle's family. Renesmee was beautiful andgifted and unique—she was one of a kind. He could not be allowed to see her, not even throughsomeone's thoughts.　　And I was the only one whose thoughts he could not hear. Of course I would go alone.　　Alice did not see any trouble with my trip, but she was worried by the indistinct quality of her visions.　　She said they were sometimes similarly hazy when there were outside decisions that might conflict butthat had not been solidly resolved. This uncertainty made Edward, already hesitant, extremely opposedto what I had to do. He wanted to come with me as far as my connection in London, but I wouldn't leaveRenesmee without both her parents. Carlisle was coming instead. It made both Edward and me a littlemore relaxed, knowing that Carlisle would be only a few hours away from me.　　Alice kept searching for the future, but the things she found were unrelated to what she was looking for.　　A new trend in the stock market; a possible visit of reconciliation from Irina, though her decision was notfirm; a snowstorm that wouldn't hit for another six weeks; a call from Renee (I was practicing my "rough"voice, and getting better at it every day—to Renee's knowledge, I was still sick, but mending).　　We bought the tickets for Italy the day after Renesmee turned three months. I planned for it to be a veryshort trip, so I hadn't told Charlie about it. Jacob knew, and he took Edward's view on things. However,today the argument was about Brazil. Jacob was determined to come with us.　　The three of us, Jacob, Renesmee, and I, were hunting together. The diet of animal blood wasn'tRenesmee's favorite thing—and that was why Jacob was allowed to come along. Jacob had made it acontest between them, and that made her more willing than anything else.　　Renesmee was quite clear on the whole good vs. bad as it applied to hunting humans; she just thoughtthat donated blood made a nice compromise. Human food filled her and it seemed compatible with hersystem, but she reacted to all varieties of solid food with the same martyred endurance I had once givencauliflower and lima beans. Animal blood was better than that, at least. She had a competitive nature,and the challenge of beating Jacob made her excited to hunt.　　"Jacob," I said, trying to reason with him again while Renesmee danced ahead of us into the longclearing, searching for a scent she liked. "You've got obligations here. Seth, Leah—"He snorted. "I'm not my pack's nanny. They've all got responsibilities in La Push anyway.""Sort of like you? Are you officially dropping out of high school, then? If you're going to keep up withRenesmee, you're going to have to study a lot harder.""It's just a sabbatical. I'll get back to school when things... slow down."I lost my concentration on my side of the disagreement when he said that, and we both automaticallylooked atRenesmee. She was staring at the snowflakes fluttering high above her head, melting before they couldstick to the yellowed grass in the long arrowhead-shaped meadow that we were standing in. Her ruffledivory dress was just a shade darker than the snow, and her reddish-brown curls managed to shimmer,though the sun was buried deeply behind the clouds.　　As we watched, she crouched for an instant and then sprang fifteen feet up into the air. Her little handsclosed around a flake, and she dropped lightly to her feet.　　She turned to us with her shocking smile—truly, it wasn't something you could get used to—and openedher hands to show us the perfectly formed eight-pointed ice star in her palm before it melted.　　"Pretty," Jacob called to her appreciatively. "But I think you're stalling, Nessie."She bounded back to Jacob; he held his arms out at exactly the moment she leaped into them. They hadthe move perfectly synchronized. She did this when she had something to say. She still preferred not tospeak aloud.　　Renesmee touched his face, scowling adorably as we all listened to the sound of a small herd of elkmoving farther into the wood.　　"Suuuureyou're not thirsty, Nessie," Jacob answered a little sarcastically, but more indulgently thananything else. "You're just afraid HI catch the biggest one again!"She flipped backward out of Jacob's arms, landing lightly on her feet, and rolled her eyes—she lookedso much like Edward when she did that. Then she darted off toward the trees.　　"Got it," Jacob said when I leaned as if to follow. He yanked his t-shirt off as he charged after her intothe forest, already trembling. "It doesn't count if you cheat," he called to Renesmee.　　I smiled at the leaves they left fluttering behind them, shaking my head. Jacob was more a child thanRenesmee sometimes.　　I paused, giving my hunters a few minutes' head start. It would be beyond simple to track them, andRenesmee would love to surprise me with the size of her prey. I smiled again.　　The narrow meadow was very still, very empty. The fluttering snow was thinning above me, almostgone. Alice had seen that it wouldn't stick for many weeks.　　Usually Edward and I came together on these hunting trips. But Edward was with Carlisle today,planning the trip to Rio, talking behind Jacob's back.... I frowned. When I returned, I would take Jacob'sside. He should come with us. He had as big a stake in this as any of us—his entire life was at stake, justlike mine.　　While my thoughts were lost in the near future, my eyes swept the mountainside routinely, searching forprey, searching for danger. I didn't think about it; the urge was an automatic thing.　　Or perhaps there was a reason for my scanning, some tiny trigger that my razor-sharp senses had caughtbefore I realized it consciously.　　As my eyes flitted across the edge of a distant cliff, standing out starkly blue-gray against thegreen-black forest, a glint of silver—or was it gold?—gripped my attention.　　My gaze zeroed in on the color that shouldn't have been there, so far away in the haze that an eaglewouldn'thave been able to make it out. I stared.　　She stared back.　　That she was a vampire was obvious. Her skin was marble white, the texture a million times smootherthan human skin. Even under the clouds, she glistened ever so slightly. If her skin had not given her away,her stillness would have. Only vampires and statues could be so perfectly motionless.　　Her hair was pale, pale blond, almost silver. This was the gleam that had caught my eye. It hung straightas a ruler to a blunt edge at her chin, parted evenly down the center.　　She was a stranger to me. I was absolutely certain I'd never seen her before, even as a human. None ofthe faces in my muddy memory were the same as this one. But I knew her at once from her dark goldeneyes.　　Irina had decided to come after all.　　For one moment I stared at her, and she stared back. I wondered if she would guess immediately who Iwas as well. I half-raised my hand, about to wave, but her lip twisted the tiniest bit, making her facesuddenly hostile.　　I heard Renesmee's cry of victory from the forest, heard Jacob's echoing howl, and saw Irina's face jerkreflexively to the sound when it echoed to her a few seconds later. Her gaze cut slightly to the right, and Iknew what she was seeing. An enormous russet werewolf, perhaps the very one who had killed herLaurent. How long had she been watching us? Long enough to see our affectionate exchange before, Iwas sure.　　Her face spasmed in pain.　　Instinctually, I opened my hands in front of me in an apologetic gesture. She turned back to me, and herlip curled back over her teeth. Her jaw unlocked as she growled.　　When the faint sound reached me, she had already turned and disappeared into the forest.　　"Crap!" I groaned.　　I sprinted into the forest after Renesmee and Jacob, unwilling to have them out of my sight. I didn't knowwhich direction Irina had taken, or exactly how furious she was right now. Vengeance was a commonobsession for vampires, one that was not easy to suppress.　　Running at full speed, it only took me two seconds to reach them.　　"Mine is bigger," I heard Renesmee insist as I burst through the thick thornbushes to the small openspace where they stood.　　Jacob's ears flattened as he took in my expression; he crouched forward, baring his teeth—hismuzzlewas streaked with blood from his kill. His eyes raked the forest. I could hear the growl building in histhroat.　　Renesmee was every bit as alert as Jacob. Abandoning the dead stag at her feet, she leaped into mywaiting arms, pressing her curious hands against my cheeks.　　"I'm overreacting," I assured them quickly. "It's okay, I think. Hold on."I pulled out my cell phone and hit the speed dial. Edward answered on the first ring. Jacob andRenesmee listened intently to my side as I filled Edward in.　　"Come, bring Carlisle," I trilled so fast I wondered if Jacob could keep up. "I saw Irina, and she saw me,but thenshe saw Jacob and she got mad and ran away, I think. She hasn't shown up here—yet, anyway—butshe looked pretty upset so maybe she will. If she doesn't, you and Carlisle have to go after her and talkto her. I feel so bad."Jacob rumbled.　　"We'll be there in half a minute," Edward assured me, and I could hear the whoosh of the wind hisrunning made.　　We darted back to the long meadow and then waited silently as Jacob and I listened carefully for thesound of an approach we did not recognize.　　When the sound came, though, it was very familiar. And then Edward was at my side, Carlisle a fewseconds behind. I was surprised to hear the heavy pad of big paws following behind Carlisle. I supposedI shouldn't have been shocked. With Renesmee in even a hint of danger, of course Jacob would call inreinforcements.　　"She was up on that ridge," I told them at once, pointing out the spot. If Irina was fleeing, she alreadyhad quite a head start. Would she stop and listen to Carlisle? Her expression before made me think not.　　"Maybe you should call Emmett and Jasper and have them come with you. She looked... really upset.　　She growled at me.""What?" Edward said angrily.　　Carlisle put a hand on his arm. "She's grieving. HI go after her."Tm coming with you," Edward insisted.　　They exchanged a long glance—perhaps Carlisle was measuring Edward's irritation with Irina against hishelpfulness as a mind reader. Finally, Carlisle nodded, and they took off to find the trail without calling forJasper or Emmett.　　Jacob huffed impatiently and poked my back with his nose. He must want Renesmee back at the safetyof the house, just in case. I agreed with him on that, and we hurried home with Seth and Leah running atour flanks.　　Renesmee was complacent in my arms, one hand still resting on my face. Since the hunting trip had beenaborted, she would just have to make do with donated blood. Her thoughts were a little smug.
    Chapter 28 The Future
    Carlisle and Edward had not been able to catch up with Irina before her trail disappeared into the sound.　　They'd swum to the other bank to see if her trail had picked up in a straight line, but there was no trace ofher for miles in either direction on the eastern shore.　　It was all my fault. She had come, as Alice had seen, to make peace with the Cullens, only to beangered by my camaraderie with Jacob. I wished I'd noticed her earlier, before Jacob had phased. Iwished we'd gone hunting somewhere else.　　There wasn't much to be done. Carlisle had called Tanya with the disappointing news. Tanya and Katehadn't seen Irina since they'd decided to come to my wedding, and they were distraught that Irina hadcome so close and yet not returned home; it wasn't easy for them to lose their sister, however temporarythe separation might be. I wondered if this brought back hard memories of losing their mother so manycenturies ago.　　Alice was able to catch a few glimpses of Irina's immediate future, nothing too concrete. She wasn'tgoing back to Denali, as far as Alice could tell. The picture was hazy. All Alice could see was that Irinawas visibly upset; she wandered in the snow-swathed wilderness—to the north? To the east?—with adevastated expression. She made no decisions for a new course beyond her directionless grieving.　　Days passed and, though of course I forgot nothing, Irina and her pain moved to the back of my mind.　　There were more important things to think of now. I would leave for Italy in just a few days. When I gotback, we'd all be off to South America.　　Every detail had been gone over a hundred times already. We would start with the Ticunas, tracing theirlegends as well as we could at the source. Now that it was accepted that Jacob would come with us, hefigured prominently in the plans—it was unlikely that the people who believed in vampires would speakto any of us about their stories. If we dead-ended with the Ticunas, there were many closely relatedtribes in the area to research. Carlisle had some oldfriends in the Amazon; if we could find them, they might have information for us, too. Or at least asuggestion as to where else we might go for answers. It was unlikely that the three Amazon vampires hadanything to do with the legends of vampire hybrids themselves, as they were all female. There was noway to know how long our search would take.　　I hadn't told Charlie about the longer trip yet, and I stewed about what to say to him while Edward andCarlisle's discussion went on. How to break the news to him just right?　　I stared at Renesmee while I debated internally. She was curled up on the sofa now, her breathing slowwith heavy sleep, her tangled curls splayed wildly around her face.Usually, Edward and I took her backto our cottage to put her to bed, but tonight we lingered with the family, he and Carlisle deep in theirplanning session.　　Meanwhile, Emmett and Jasper were more excited about planning the hunting possibilities. The Amazonoffered a change from our normal quarry. Jaguars and panthers, for example. Emmett had a whim towrestle with an anaconda. Esme and Rosalie were planning what they would pack. Jacob was off withSam's pack, setting things up for his own absence.　　Alice moved slowly—for her—around the big room, unnecessarily tidying the already immaculate space,straightening Esme's perfectly hung garlands. She was re-centering Esme's vases on the console at themoment. I could see from the way her face fluctuated—aware, then blank, then aware again—that shewas searching the future. I assumed she was trying to see through the blind spots that Jacob andRenesmee made in her visions as to what was waiting for us in South America until Jasper said, "Let itgo, Alice; she's not our concern," and a cloud of serenity stole silently and invisibly through the room.　　Alice must have been worrying about Irina again.　　She stuck her tongue out at Jasper and then lifted one crystal vase that was filled with white and redroses and turned toward the kitchen. There was just the barest hint of wilt to one of the white flowers,but Alice seemed intent on utter perfection as a distraction to her lack of vision tonight.　　Staring at Renesmee again, I didn't see it when the vase slipped from Alice's fingers. I only heard thewhoosh of the air whistling past the crystal, and my eyes flickered up in time to see the vase shatter intoten thousand diamond shards against the edge of the kitchen's marble floor.　　We were perfectly still as the fragmented crystal bounced and skittered in every direction with anunmusical tinkling, all eyes on Alice's back.　　My first illogical thought was that Alice was playing some joke on us. Because there was no way thatAlice could have dropped the vase by accident I could have darted across the room to catch the vase inplenty of time myself, if I hadn't assumed she would get it. And how would it fall through her fingers in thefirst place? Her perfectly sure fingers...　　I had never seen a vampire drop anything by accident. Ever.　　And then Alice was facing us, twisting in a move so fast it didn't exist.　　Her eyes were halfway here and halfway locked on the future, wide, staring, filling her thin face till theyseemed to overflow it. Looking into her eyes was like looking out of a grave from the inside; I was buriedin the terror anddespair and agony of her gaze.　　I heard Edward gasp; it was a broken, half-choked sound.　　"What?"Jasper growled, leaping to her side in a blurred rush of movement, crushing the broken crystalunder his feet. He grabbed her shoulders and shook her sharply. She seemed to rattle silently in hishands. "What Alice?"Emmett moved into my peripheral vision, his teeth bared while his eyes darted toward the window,anticipating an attack.　　There was only silence from Esme, Carlisle, and Rose, who were frozen just as I was.　　Jasper shook Alice again. "What is it?""They're coming for us," Alice and Edward whispered together, perfectly synchronized. "All of them."Silence.　　For once, I was the quickest to understand—because something in their words triggered my own vision.　　It was only the distant memory of a dream—faint, transparent, indistinct as if I were peering through thickgauze.... In my head, I saw a line of black advancing on me, the ghost of my half-forgotten humannightmare. I could not see the glint of their ruby eyes in the shrouded image, or the shine of their sharpwet teeth, but I knew where the gleam should be....　　Stronger than the memory of the sight came the memory of the feel —the wrenching need to protect theprecious thing behind me.　　I wanted to snatch Renesmee up into my arms, to hide her behind my skin and hair, to make herinvisible. But I couldn't even turn to look at her. I felt not like stone but ice. For the first time since I'dbeen reborn a vampire, I felt cold.　　I barely heard the confirmation of my fears. I didn't need it. I already knew.　　"The Volturi," Alice moaned.　　"All of them," Edward groaned at the same time.　　"Why?" Alice whispered to herself. "How?""When?" Edward whispered.　　"Why?" Esme echoed.　　"When?"Jasper repeated in a voice like splintering ice.　　Alice's eyes didn't blink, but it was as if a veil covered them; they became perfectly blank. Only hermouth held on to her expression of horror.　　"Not long," she and Edward said together. Then she spoke alone. "There's snow on the forest, snow onthe town. Little more than a month.""Why?" Carlisle was the one to ask this time.　　Esme answered. "They must have a reason. Maybe to see ...""This isn't about Bella," Alice said hollowly. "They're all coming—Aro, Caius, Marcus, every member ofthe guard, even the wives.""The wives never leave the tower," Jasper contradicted her in a flat voice. "Never. Not during thesouthern rebellion. Not when the Romanians tried to overthrow them. Not even when they were huntingthe immortal children. Never.""They're coming now," Edward whispered.　　"But why?" Carlisle said again. "We've done nothing! And if we had, what could we possibly do thatwould bring f/?/sdown on us?""There are so many of us," Edward answered dully. "They must want to make sure that..." He didn'tfinish.　　"That doesn't answer the crucial question! Why?"I felt I knew the answer to Carlisle's question, and yet at the same time I didn't. Renesmee was thereason why, I was sure. Somehow I'd known from the very beginning that they would come for her. Mysubconscious had warned me before I'd known I was carrying her. It felt oddly expected now. As if I'dsomehow always known that the Volturi would come to take my happiness from me.　　But that still didn't answer the question.　　"Go back, Alice," Jasper pleaded. "Look for the trigger. Search."Alice shook her head slowly, her shoulders sagging. "It came out of nowhere, Jazz. I wasn't looking forthem, or even for us. I was just looking for Irina. She wasn't where I expected her to be...." Alice trailedoff, her eyes drifting again. She stared at nothing for a long second.　　And then her head jerked up, her eyes hard as flint. I heard Edward catch his breath.　　"She decided to go to them," Alice said. "Irina decided to go to the Volturi. And then they will decide....　　It's as if they're waiting for her. Like their decision was already made, and just waiting on her___"It was silent again as we digested this. What would Irina tell the Volturi that would result in Alice'sappalling vision?　　"Can we stop her?" Jasper asked.　　"There's no way. She's almost there.""What is she doing?" Carlisle was asking, but I wasn't paying attention to the discussion now. All myfocus was on the picture that was painstakingly coming together in my head.　　I pictured Irina poised on the cliff, watching. What had she seen? A vampire and a werewolf who werebest friends. I'd been focused on that image, one that would obviously explain her reaction. But that wasnot all that she'd seen.　　She'd also seen a child. An exquisitely beautiful child, showing off in the falling snow, clearly more thanhuman...　　Irina... the orphaned sisters... Carlisle had said that losing their mother to the Volturi's justice had madeTanya, Kate, and Irina purists when it came to the law.　　Just half a minute ago, Jasper had said the words himself: Not even when they were hunting theimmortal children.... The immortal children—the unmentionable bane, the appalling taboo...　　With Irina's past, how could she apply any other reading to what she'd seen that day in the narrow field?　　Shehad not been close enough to hear Renesmee's heart, to feel the heat radiating from her body.　　Renesmee's rosy cheeks could have been a trick on our part for all she knew.　　After all, the Cullens were in league with werewolves. From Irina's point of view, maybe this meantnothing was beyond us....　　Irina, wringing her hands in the snowy wilderness—not mourning Laurent, after all, but knowing it washer duty to turn the Cullens in, knowing what would happen to them if she did. Apparently herconscience had won out over the centuries of friendship.　　And the Volturi's response to this kind of infraction was so automatic, it was already decided.　　I turned and draped myself over Renesmee's sleeping body, covering her with my hair, burying my facein her curls.　　"Think of what she saw that afternoon," I said in a low voice, interrupting whatever Emmett wasbeginning to say. "To someone who'd lost a mother because of the immortal children, what wouldRenesmee look like?"Everything was silent again as the others caught up to where I was already.　　"An immortal child," Carlisle whispered.　　I felt Edward kneel beside me, wrap his arms over us both.　　"But she's wrong," I went on. "Renesmee isn't like those other children. They were frozen, but she growsso much every day. They were out of control, but she never hurts Charlie or Sue or even shows themthings that would upset them. She can control herself. She's already smarter than most adults. Therewould be no reason___"I babbled on, waiting for someone to exhale with relief, waiting for the icy tension in the room to relax asthey realized I was right. The room just seemed to get colder. Eventually my small voice trailed off intosilence.　　No one spoke for a long time.　　Then Edward whispered into my hair. "It's not the kind of crime they hold a trial for, love," he saidquietly. "Aro's seen Irina's proof in her thoughts. They come to destroy, not to be reasoned with.""But they're wrong," I said stubbornly.　　"They won't wait for us to show them that."His voice was still quiet, gentle, velvet... and yet the pain and desolation in the sound was unavoidable.　　His voice was like Alice's eyes before—like the inside of a tomb.　　"What can we do?" I demanded.　　Renesmee was so warm and perfect in my arms, dreaming peacefully. I'd worried so much aboutRenesmee's speeding age—worried that she would only have little over a decade of life.... That terrorseemed ironic now.　　Little over a month...　　Was this the limit, then? I'd had more happiness than most people ever experienced. Was there somenatural law that demanded equal shares of happiness and misery in the world? Was my joy overthrowingthe balance? Was four months all I could have?　　It was Emmett who answered my rhetorical question.　　"We fight," he said calmly.　　"We can't win," Jasper growled. I could imagine how his face would look, how his body would curveprotectively over Alice's.　　"Well, we can't run. Not with Demetri around." Emmett made a disgusted noise, and I knew instinctivelythat he was not upset by the idea of the Volturi's tracker but by the idea of running away. "And I don'tknow that we can't win," he said. "There are a few options to consider. We don't have to fight alone."My head snapped up at that. "We don't have to sentence the Quileutes to death, either, Emmett!""Chill, Bella." His expression was no different from when he was contemplating fighting anacondas. Eventhe threat of annihilation couldn't change Emmett's perspective, his ability to thrill to a challenge. "I didn'tmean the pack. Be realistic, though—do you think Jacob or Sam is going to ignore an invasion? Even if itwasn't about Nessie? Not to mention that, thanks to Irina, Aro knows about our alliance with the packnow, too. But I was thinking of our other friends."Carlisle echoed me in a whisper. "Other friends we don't have to sentence to death.""Hey, we'll let them decide," Emmett said in a placating tone. "I'm not saying they have to fight with us." Icould see the plan refining itself in his head as he spoke. "If they'd just stand beside us, just long enoughto make the Volturi hesitate. Bella's right, after all. If we could force them to stop and listen. Though thatmight take away any reason for a fight___"There was a hint of a smile on Emmett's face now. I was surprised no one had hit him yet. I wanted to.　　"Yes," Esme said eagerly. "That makes sense, Emmett. All we need is for the Volturi to pause for onemoment. Just long enough to listen*"We'd need quite a show of witnesses," Rosalie said harshly, her voice brittle as glass.　　Esme nodded in agreement, as if she hadn't heard the sarcasm in Rosalie's tone. "We can ask that muchof our friends. Just to witness.""We'd do it for them," Emmett said.　　"We'll have to ask them just right," Alice murmured. I looked to see her eyes were a dark void again.　　"They'll have to be shown very carefully.""Shown?"Jasper asked.　　Alice and Edward both looked down at Renesmee. Then Alice's eyes glazed over.　　"Tanya's family," she said. "Siobhan's coven. Amun's. Some of the nomads—Garrett and Mary forcertain. Maybe Alistair.""What about Peter and Charlotte?" Jasper asked half fearfully, as if he hoped the answer was no, and hisold brother could be spared from the coming carnage.　　"Maybe.""The Amazons?" Carlisle asked. "Kachiri, Zafrina, and Senna?"Alice seemed too deep into her vision to answer at first; finally she shuddered, and her eyes flickeredback tothe present. She met Carlisle's gaze for the tiniest part of a second, and then looked down.　　"I can't see.""What was that?" Edward asked, his whisper a demand. "That part in the jungle. Are we going to lookfor them?""I can't see," Alice repeated, not meeting his eyes. A flash of confusion crossed Edward's face. "We'llhave to split up and hurry—before the snow sticks to the ground. We have to round up whomever wecan and get them here to show them." She zoned again. "Ask Eleazar. There is more to this than just animmortal child."The silence was ominous for another long moment while Alice was in her trance. She blinked slowlywhen it was over, her eyes peculiarly opaque despite the fact that she was clearly in the present.　　"There is so much. We have to hurry," she whispered.　　"Alice?" Edward asked. "That was too fast—I didn't understand. What was—?""I can't see!" she exploded back at him. "Jacob's almost here!"Rosalie took a step toward the front door. "I'll deal with—""No, let him come," Alice said quickly, her voice straining higher with each word. She grabbed Jasper'shand and began pulling him toward the back door. "I'll see better away from Nessie, too. I need to go. Ineed to really concentrate. I need to see everything I can. I have to go. Come on, Jasper, there's no timeto waste!"We all could hear Jacob on the stairs. Alice yanked, impatient, on Jasper's hand. He followed quickly,confusion in his eyes just like Edward's. They darted out the door into the silver night.　　"Hurry!" she called back to us. "You have to find them all!""Find what?" Jacob asked, shutting the front door behind himself. "Where'd Alice go?"No one answered; we all just stared.　　Jacob shook the wet from his hair and pulled his arms through the sleeves of his t-shirt, his eyes onRenesmee. "Hey, Bells! I thought you guys would've gone home by now___"He looked up to me finally, blinked, and then stared. I watched his expression as the room's atmospherefinally touched him. He glanced down, eyes wide, at the wet spot on the floor, the scattered roses, thefragments of crystal. His fingers quivered.　　"What?" he asked flatly. "What happened?"I couldn't think where to begin. No one else found the words, either.　　Jacob crossed the room in three long strides and dropped to his knees beside Renesmee and me. Icould feel the heat shaking off his body as tremors rolled down his arms to his shaking hands.　　"Is she okay?" he demanded, touching her forehead, tilting his head as he listened to her heart. "Don'tmess with me, Bella, please!""Nothing's wrong with Renesmee," I choked out, the words breaking in strange places.　　"Then who?""All of us, Jacob," I whispered. And it was there in my voice, too—the sound of the inside of a grave.　　"It's over. We've all been sentenced to die."
    Chapter 29 Defection
    We sat there all night long, statues of horror and grief, and Alice never came back.　　We were all at our limits—frenzied into absolute stillness. Carlisle had barely been able to move his lipsto explain it all to Jacob. The retelling seemed to make it worse; even Emmett stood silent and still fromthen on.　　It wasn't until the sun rose and I knew that Renesmee would soon be stirring under my hands that Iwondered for the first time what could possibly be taking Alice so long. I'd hoped to know more before Iwas faced with my daughter's curiosity. To have some answers. Some tiny, tiny portion of hope so that Icould smile and keep the truth from terrifying her, too.　　My face felt permanently set into the fixed mask it had worn all night. I wasn't sure I had the ability tosmile anymore.　　Jacob was snoring in the corner, a mountain of fur on the floor, twitching anxiously in his sleep. Samknew everything—the wolves were readying themselves for what was coming. Not that this preparationwould do anything but get them killed with the rest of my family.　　Thesunlight broke through the back windows, sparkling on Edward's skin. My eyes had not moved fromhis since Alice's departure. We'd stared at each other all night, staring at what neither of us could livethrough losing: the other. I saw my reflection glimmer in his agonized eyes as the sun touched my ownskin.　　His eyebrows moved an infinitesimal bit, then his lips.　　"Alice," he said.　　Thesound of hisvoice was like ice cracking as it melted. All of us fractured a little, softened a little.　　Moved again.　　"She's been gone a long time,"Rosalie murmured, surprised.　　"Where could she be?" Emmett wondered, taking a step toward the door.　　Esme put a hand on her arm. "We don't want to disturb ...""She's never taken so long before," Edward said. New worry splintered the mask his face had become.　　His features were alive again, his eyes suddenly wide with fresh fear, extra panic. "Carlisle, you don'tthink—something preemptive? Would Alice have had time to see if they sent someone for her?"Aro's translucent-skinned face filled my head. Aro, who had seen into all the corners of Alice's mind,who knew everything she was capable of—Emmett cussed loud enough that Jacob lurched to his feet with a growl. In the yard, his growl wasechoed by his pack. My family was already a blur of action.　　"Stay with Renesmee!" I all but shrieked at Jacob as I sprinted through the door.　　I was still stronger than the rest of them, and I used that strength to push myself forward. I overtookEsme in a few bounds, and Rosalie in just a few strides more. I raced through the thick forest until I wasright behind Edward and Carlisle.　　"Would they have been able to surprise her?" Carlisle asked, his voice as even as if he were standingmotionless rather than running at full speed.　　"I don't see how," Edward answered. "But Aro knows her better than anyone else. Better than I do.""Is this a trap?" Emmett called from behind us.　　"Maybe," Edward said. "There's no scent but Alice and Jasper. Where were they going?"Alice and Jasper's trail was curling into a wide arc; it stretched first east of the house, but headed northon the other side of the river, and then back west again after a few miles. We recrossed the river, all sixjumping within a second of each other. Edward ran in the lead, his concentration total.　　"Did you catch that scent?" Esme called ahead a few moments after we'd leaped the river for the secondtime. She was the farthest back, on the far left edge of our hunting party. She gestured to the southeast.　　"Keep to the main trail—we're almost to the Quileute border," Edward ordered tersely. "Stay together.　　See if they turned north or south."I was not as familiar with the treaty line as the rest of them, but I could smell the hint of wolf in the breezeblowing from the east. Edward and Carlisle slowed a little out of habit, and I could see their heads sweepfrom side to side, waiting for the trail to turn.　　Then the wolf smell was suddenly stronger, and Edward's head snapped up. He came to a sudden stop.　　The rest of us froze, too.　　"Sam?" Edward asked in a flat voice. "What is this?"Sam came through the trees a few hundred yards away, walking quickly toward us in his human form,flanked by two big wolves—Paul and Jared. It took Sam a while to reach us; his human pace made meimpatient. I didn't want time to think about what was happening. I wanted to be in motion, to be doingsomething. I wanted to have my arms around Alice, to know beyond a doubt that she was safe.　　I watched Edward's face go absolutely white as he read what Sam was thinking. Sam ignored him,lookingstraight at Carlisle as he stopped walking and began to speak.　　"Right after midnight, Alice and Jasper came to this place and asked permission to cross our land to theocean. I granted them that and escorted them to the coast myself. They went immediately into the waterand did not return. As we journeyed, Alice told me it was of the utmost importance that I say nothing toJacob about seeing her until I spoke to you. I was to wait here for you to come looking for her and thengive you this note. She told me to obey her as if all our lives depended on it."Sam's face was grim as he held out a folded sheet of paper, printed all over with small black text. It wasa page out of a book; my sharp eyes read the printed words as Carlisle unfolded it to see the other side.　　The side facing me was the copyright page from The Merchant of Venice. A hint of my own scent blewoff of it as Carlisle shook the paper flat. I realized it was a page torn from one of my books. I'd brought afew things from Charlie's house to the cottage; a few sets of normal clothes, all the letters from mymother, and my favorite books. My tattered collection of Shakespeare paperbacks had been on thebookshelf in the cottage's little living room yesterday morning....　　"Alice has decided to leave us," Carlisle whispered.　　"What?" Rosalie cried.　　Carlisle turned the page around so that we all could read.　　Don't look for us. There isn't time to waste. Remember; Tanya, Siobhan, Amun, Alistair, all the nomadsyou can find. We'll seek out Peter and Charlotte on our way. We're so sorry that we have to leave youthis way, with no goodbyes or explanations. It's the only way for us. We love you.　　We stood frozen again, the silence total but for the sound of the wolves' heartbeats, their breathing. Theirthoughts must have been loud, too. Edward was first to move again, speaking in response to what heheard in Sam's head.　　"Yes, things are that dangerous.""Enough that you would abandon your family?" Sam asked out loud, censure in his tone. It was clear thathe had not read the note before giving it to Carlisle. He was upset now, looking as if he regretted listeningto Alice.　　Edward's expression was stiff—to Sam it probably looked angry or arrogant, but I could see the shapeof pain in the hard planes of his face.　　"We don't know what she saw," Edward said. "Alice is neither unfeeling nor a coward. She just hasmore information than we do.""Wewould not—," Sam began.　　"You are bound differently than we are," Edward snapped. "1/1/e each still have our free will."Sam's chin jerked up, and his eyes looked suddenly flat black.　　"But you should heed the warning," Edward went on. "This is not something you want to involveyourselves in.　　You can still avoid what Alice saw."Sam smiled grimly. "We don't run away." Behind him, Paul snorted.　　"Don't get your family slaughtered for pride," Carlisle interjected quietly.　　Sam looked at Carlisle with a softer expression. "As Edward pointed out, we don't have the same kindof freedom that you have. Renesmee is as much as part of our family now as she is yours. Jacob cannotabandon her, and we cannot abandon him." His eyes flickered to Alice's note, and his lips pressed into athinline.　　"You don't know her," Edward said.　　"Do you?" Sam asked bluntly.　　Carlisle put a hand on Edward's shoulder. "We have much to do, son. Whatever Alice's decision, wewould be foolish not to follow her advice now. Let's go home and get to work."Edward nodded, his face still rigid with pain. Behind me, I could hear Esme's quiet, tearless sobs.　　I didn't know how to cry in this body; I couldn't do anything but stare. There was no feeling yet.　　Everything seemed unreal, like I was dreaming again after all these months. Having a nightmare.　　"Thank you, Sam," Carlisle said.　　"I'm sorry," Sam answered. "We shouldn't have let her through.""You did the right thing," Carlisle told him. "Alice is free to do what she will. I wouldn't deny her thatliberty."I'd always thought of the Cullens as a whole, an indivisible unit. Suddenly, I remembered that it had notalways been so. Carlisle had created Edward, Esme, Rosalie and Emmett; Edward had created me. Wewere physically linked by blood and venom. I never thought of Alice and Jasper as separate—asadopted into the family. But in truth, Alice had adopted the Cullens. She had shown up with herunconnected past, bringing Jasper with his, and fit herself into the family that was already there. Both sheand Jasper had known another life outside the Cullen family. Had she really chosen to lead another newlife after she'd seen that life with the Cullens was over?　　We were doomed, then, weren't we? There was no hope at all. Not one ray, one flicker that might haveconvinced Alice she had a chance at our side.　　The bright morning air seemed thicker suddenly, blacker, as if physically darkened by my despair.　　"I'mnot going down without a fight," Emmett snarled low under his breath. "Alice told us what to do.　　Let's get it done."The others nodded with determined expressions, and I realized that they were banking on whateverchance Alice had given us. That they were not going to give in to hopelessness and wait to die.　　Yes, we all would fight. What else was there? And apparently we would involve others, because Alicehad said so before she'd left us. How could we not follow Alice's last warning? The wolves, too, wouldfight with us for Renesmee.　　We would fight, they would fight, and we all would die.　　I didn't feel the same resolve the others seemed to feel. Alice knew the odds. She was giving us the onlychance she could see, but the chance was too slim for her to bet on it.　　I felt already beaten as I turned my back on Sam's critical face and followed Carlisle toward home.　　We ran automatically now, not the same panicked hurry as before. As we neared the river, Esme's headlifted.　　"There was that other trail. It was fresh."She nodded forward, toward where she had called Edward's attention on the way here. While we wereracing to save Alice...　　"It has to be from earlier in the day. It was just Alice, without Jasper," Edward said lifelessly.　　Esme's face puckered, and she nodded.　　I drifted to the right, falling a little behind. I was sure Edward was right, but at the same time... After all,how had Alice's note ended up on a page from my book?　　"Bella?" Edward asked in an emotionless voice as I hesitated.　　"I want to follow the trail," I told him, smelling the light scent of Alice that led away from her earlier flightpath, i was new to this, but it smelled exactly the same to me, just minus the scent of Jasper.　　Edward's golden eyes were empty. "It probably just leads back to the house.""Then I'll meet you there."At first I thought he would let me go alone, but then, as I moved a few steps away, his blank eyesflickered to life.　　"I'll come with you," he said quietly. "Well meet you at home, Carlisle."Carlisle nodded, and the others left. I waited until they were out of sight, and then I looked at Edwardquestioningly.　　"I couldn't let you walk away from me," he explained in a low voice. "It hurt just to imagine it."I understood without more explanation than that. I thought of being divided from him now and realized Iwould have felt the same pain, no matter how short the separation.　　There was so little time left to be together.　　I held my hand out to him, and he took it.　　"Let's hurry," he said. "Renesmee will be awake."I nodded, and we were running again.　　It was probably a silly thing, to waste the time away from Renesmee just for curiosity's sake. But thenote bothered me. Alice could have carved the note into a boulder or tree trunk if she lacked writingutensils. She could have stolen a pad of Post-its from any of the houses by the highway. Why my book?　　When did she get it?　　Sure enough, the trail led back to the cottage by a circuitous route that stayed far clear of the Cullens'　　house and the wolves in the nearby woods. Edward's brows tightened in confusion as it became obviouswhere the trail led.　　He tried to reason it out. "She left Jasper to wait for her and came here?"We were almost to the cottage now, and I felt uneasy. I was glad to have Edward's hand in mine, but Ialso felt as if I should be here alone. Tearing out the page and carrying it back to Jasper was such an oddthing for Alice to do. It felt like there was a message in her action—one I didn't understand at all. But itwas my book, so the message must be for me. If it were something she wanted Edward to know,wouldn't she have pulled a page from one of hisbooks... ?　　"Give me just a minute," I said, pulling my hand free as we got to the door.　　His forehead creased. "Bella?""Please? Thirty seconds."I didn't wait for him to answer. I darted through the door, pulling it shut behind me. I went straight to thebookshelf. Alice's scent was fresh—less than a day old. A fire that I had not set burned low but hot in thefireplace. I yanked The Merchant of Venice off the shelf and flipped it open to the title page.　　There, next to the feathered edge left by the torn page, under the words The Merchant of Venice byWilliam Shakespeare, was a note.　　Destroy this.　　Below that was a name and an address in Seattle.　　When Edward came through the door after only thirteen seconds rather than thirty, I was watching thebook burn.　　"What's going on, Bella?""She was here. She ripped a page out of my book to write her note on.""Why?""I don't know why.""Why are you burning it?""I—I—" I frowned, letting all my frustration and pain show on my face. I did not know what Alice wastrying to tell me, only that she'd gone to great lengths to keep it from anyone but me. The one personwhose mind Edward could not read. So she must want to keep him in the dark, and it was probably for agood reason. "It seemed appropriate.""We don't know what she's doing," he said quietly.　　I stared into the flames. I was the only person in the world who could lie to Edward. Was that whatAlice wanted from me? Her last request?　　"When we were on the plane to Italy," I whispered—this was not a lie, except perhaps in context—"onour way to rescue you... she lied to Jasper so that he wouldn't come after us. She knew that if he facedthe Volturi, he would die. She was willing to die herself rather than put him in danger. Willing for me todie, too. Willing for you to die."Edward didn't answer.　　"She has her priorities," I said. It made my still heart ache to realize that my explanation did not feel like alie in any way.　　"I don't believe it," Edward said. He didn't say it like he was arguing with me—he said it like he wasarguing with himself. "Maybe it was just Jasper in danger. Her plan would work for the rest of us, buthe'd be lost if he stayed.　　Maybe...""She could have told us that. Sent him away.""But would Jasper have gone? Maybe she's lying to him again.""Maybe," I pretended to agree. "We should go home. There's no time."Edward took my hand, and we ran.　　Alice's note did not make me hopeful. If there were any way to avoid the coming slaughter, Alice wouldhave stayed. I couldn't see another possibility. So it was something else she was giving me. Not a way toescape. But what else would she think that I wanted? Maybe a way to salvage something? Was thereanything I could still save?　　Carlisle and the others had not been idle in our absence. We'd been separated from them for all of fiveminutes, and they were already prepared to leave. In the corner, Jacob was human again, with Renesmeeon his lap, both of them watching us with wide eyes.　　Rosalie had traded her silk wrap dress for a sturdy-looking pair of jeans, running shoes, and abutton-down shirt made of the thick weave that backpackers used for long trips. Esme was dressedsimilarly. There was a globe on the coffee table, but they were done looking at it, just waiting for us.　　The atmosphere was more positive now than before; it felt good to them to be in action. Their hopeswere pinned on Alice's instructions.　　I looked at the globe and wondered where we were headed first.　　"We're to stay here?" Edward asked, looking at Carlisle. He didn't sound happy.　　"Alice said that we would have to show people Renesmee, and we would have to be careful about it,"Carlisle said. "We'll send whomever we can find back here to you—Edward, you'll be the best at fieldingthat particular minefield."Edward gave one sharp nod, still not happy. "There's a lot of ground to cover.""We're splitting up," Emmett answered. "Rose and I are hunting for nomads.""You'll have your hands full here," Carlisle said. "Tanya's family will be here in the morning, and theyhave no idea why. First, you have to persuade them not to react the way Irina did. Second, you've got tofind out what Alice meant about Eleazar. Then, after all that, will they stay to witness for us? It will startagain as the others come—if we can persuade anyone to come in the first place." Carlisle sighed. "Yourjob may well be the hardest. We'll be back to help as soon as we can."Carlisle put his hand on Edward's shoulder for a second and then kissed my forehead. Esme hugged usboth, and Emmett punched us both on the arm. Rosalie forced a hard smile for Edward and me, blew akiss to Renesmee, and then gave Jacob a parting grimace.　　"Good luck," Edward told them.　　"And to you," Carlisle said. "We'll all need it."I watched them leave, wishing I could feel whatever hope bolstered them, and wishing I could be alonewith the computer for just a few seconds. I had to figure out who this J. Jenks person was and why Alicehad gone to suchlengths to give his name to only me.　　Renesmee twisted in Jacob's arms to touch his cheek.　　"I don't know if Carlisle's friends will come. I hope so. Sounds like we're a little outnumbered right now,"Jacob murmured to Renesmee.　　So she knew. Renesmee already understood only too clearly what was going on. The wholeimprinted-werewolf-gives-the-object-of-his-imprinting-whatever-she-wants thing was getting old prettyfast. Wasn't shielding her more important than answering her questions?　　I looked carefully at her face. She did not look frightened, only anxious and very serious as sheconversed with Jacob in her silent way.　　"No, we can't help; we've got to stay here," he went on. "People are coming to see you, not thescenery."Renesmee frowned at him.　　"No, I don't have to go anywhere," he said to her. Then he looked at Edward, his face stunned by therealization that he might be wrong. "Do I?"Edward hesitated.　　"Spit it out," Jacob said, his voice raw with tension. He was right at his breaking point, just like the restof us.　　"The vampires who are coming to help us are not the same as we are," Edward said. "Tanya's family isthe only one besides ours with a reverence for human life, and even they don't think much of werewolves.　　I think it might be safer—""I can take care of myself," Jacob interrupted.　　"Safer for Renesmee," Edward continued, "if the choice to believe our story about her is not tainted byan association with werewolves.""Some friends. They'd turn on you just because of who you hang out with now?""I think they would mostly be tolerant under normal circumstances. But you need to understand—accepting Nessie will not be a simple thing for any of them. Why make it even the slightest bit harder?"Carlisle had explained the laws about immortal children to Jacob last night. "The immortal children werereally that bad?" he asked.　　"You can't imagine the depth of the scars they've left in the collective vampire psyche.""Edward ..." It was still odd to hear Jacob use Edward's name without bitterness.　　"I know, Jake. I know how hard it is to be away from her. We'll play it by ear— see how they react toher. In any case, Nessie is going to have to be incognito off and on in the next few weeks. She'll need tostay at the cottage until the right moment for us to introduce her. As long as you keep a safe distancefrom the main house ...""I can do that. Company in the morning, huh?""Yes. The closest of our friends. In this particular case, it's probably better if we get things out in theopen as soon as possible. You can stay here. Tanya knows about you. She's even met Seth.""You should tell Sam what's going on. There might be strangers in the woods soon.""Good point. Though I owe him some silence after last night.""Listening to Alice is usually the right thing."Jacob's teeth ground together, and I could see that he shared Sam's feelings about what Alice andJasper had done.　　While they were talking, I wandered toward the back windows, trying to look distracted and anxious.　　Not a difficult thing to do. I leaned my head against the wall that curved away from the living roomtoward the dining room, right next to one of the computer desks. I ran my fingers against the keys whilestaring into the forest, trying to make it look like an absentminded thing. Did vampires ever do thingsabsentmindedly? I didn't think anyone was paying particular attention to me, but I didn't turn to makesure. The monitor glowed to life. I stroked my fingers across the keys again. Then I drummed them veryquietly on the wooden desktop, just to make it seem random. Another stroke across the keys.　　I scanned the screen in my peripheral vision.　　No J. Jenks, but there was a Jason Jenks. A lawyer. I brushed the keyboard, trying to keep a rhythm,like the preoccupied stroking of a cat you'd all but forgotten on your lap. Jason Jenks had a fancywebsite for his firm, but the address on the homepage was wrong. In Seattle, but in a different zip code. Inoted the phone number and then stroked the keyboard in rhythm. This time I searched the address, butnothing at all came up, as if the address didn't exist. I wanted to look at a map, but I decided I waspushing my luck. One more brush, to delete the history___I continued staring out the window and brushed the wood a few times. I heard light footsteps crossingthe floor to me, and I turned with what I hoped was the same expression as before.　　Renesmee reached for me, and I held my arms open. She launched herself into them, smelling strongly ofwerewolf, and nestled her head against my neck.　　I didn't know if I could stand this. As much as I feared for my life, for Edward's, for the rest of myfamily's, it was not the same as the gut-wrenching terror I felt for my daughter. There had to be a way tosave her, even if that was the only thing I could do.　　Suddenly, I knew that this was all I wanted anymore. The rest I would bear if I had to, but not her lifebeing forfeited. Not that.　　She was the one thing I simply had to save.　　Would Alice have known how I would feel?　　Renesmee's hand touched my cheek lightly.　　She showed me my own face, Edward's, Jacob's, Rosalie's, Esme's, Carlisle's, Alice's, Jasper's, flippingthrough all our family's faces faster and faster. Seth and Leah. Charlie, Sue, and Billy. Over and overagain. Worrying, like the rest of us were. She was only worrying, though. Jake had kept the worst fromher as far as I could tell. The part about how we had no hope, how we all were going to die in a month'stime.　　She settled on Alice's face, longing and confused. Where was Alice?　　"I don't know," I whispered. "But she's Alice. She's doing the right thing, like always."The right thing for Alice, anyway. I hated thinking of her that way, but how else could the situation beunderstood?　　Renesmee sighed, and the longing intensified.　　"I miss her, too."I felt my face working, trying to find the expression that went with the grief inside. My eyes felt strangeand dry; they blinked against the uncomfortable feeling. I bit my lip. When I took my next breath, the airhitched in my throat, like I was choking on it.　　Renesmee pulled back to look at me, and I saw my face mirrored in her thoughts and in her eyes. Ilooked like Esme had this morning.　　So this was what it felt like to cry.　　Renesmee's eyes glistened wetly as she watched my face. She stroked my face, showing me nothing,just trying to soothe me.　　I'd never thought to see the mother-daughter bond reversed between us, the way it had always been forRenee and me. But I hadn't had a very clear view of the future.　　A tear welled up on the edge of Renesmee's eye. I wiped it away with a kiss. She touched her eye inamazement and then looked at the wetness on her fingertip.　　"Don't cry," I told her. "It's going to be okay. You're going to be fine. I will find you a way through this."If there was nothing else I could do, I would still save my Renesmee. I was more positive than ever thatthis was what Alice would give me. She would know. She would have left me a way.
    Chapter 30 Irresistible
    There was so much to think about.　　How was I going to find time alone to hunt down J. Jenks, and why did Alice want me to know abouthim?　　If Alice's clue had nothing to do with Renesmee, what could I do to save my daughter?　　How were Edward and I going to explain things to Tanya's family in the morning? What if they reactedlike Irina? What if it turned into a fight?　　I didn't know how to fight. How was I going to learn in just a month? Was there any chance at all that Icould be taught fast enough that I might be a danger to any one member of the Volturi? Or was Idoomed to be totally useless? Just another easily dispatched newborn?　　So many answers I needed, but I did not get the chance to ask my questions.　　Wanting some normality for Renesmee, I'd insisted on taking her home to our cottage at bedtime. Jacobwas more comfortable in his wolf form at the moment; the stress was easier dealt with when he felt readyfor a fight. I wished that I could feel the same, could feel ready. He ran in the woods, on guard again.　　After she was deeply under, I put Renesmee in her bed and then went to the front room to ask myquestions of Edward. The ones I was able to ask, at any rate; one of the most difficult of problems wasthe idea of trying to hide anything from him, even with the advantage of my silent thoughts.　　He stood with his back to me, staring into the fire.　　"Edward, I—"He spun and was across the room in what seemed like no time at all, not even the smallest part of asecond. I only had time to register the ferocious expression on his face before his lips were crushingagainst mine and his arms were locked around me like steel girders.　　I didn't think of my questions again for the rest of that night. It didn't take long for me to grasp the reasonfor hismood, and even less time to feel exactly the same way.　　I'd been planning on needing years just to somewhat organize the overwhelming passion I felt for himphysically. And then centuries after that to enjoy it. if we had only a month left together... Well, I didn'tsee how I could stand to have this end. For the moment I couldn't help but be selfish. All I wanted was tolove him as much as possible in the limited time given to me.　　It was hard to pull myself away from him when the sun came up, but we had our job to do, a job thatmight be more difficult than all the rest of our family's searches put together. As soon as I let myself thinkof what was coming, i was all tension; it felt like my nerves were being stretched on a rack, thinner andthinner.　　"I wish there was a way to get the information we need from Eleazar before we tell them about Nessie,"Edward muttered as we hurriedly dressed in the huge closet that was more reminder of Alice than Iwanted at the moment. "Just in case.""But he wouldn't understand the question to answer it," I agreed. "Do you think they'll let us explain?""I don't know."I pulled Renesmee, still sleeping, from her bed and held her close so that her curls were pressed againstmy face; her sweet scent, so close, overpowered every other smell.　　I couldn't waste one second of time today. There were answers I needed, and wasn't sure how muchtime Edward and I would have alone today. If all went well with Tanya's family, hopefully we would havecompany for an extended period.　　"Edward, will you teach me how to fight?" I asked him, tensed for his reaction, as he held the door forme.　　It was what I expected. He froze, and then his eyes swept over me with a deep significance, like he waslooking at me for the first or last time. His eyes lingered on our daughter sleeping in my arms.　　"If it comes to a fight, there won't be much any of us can do," he hedged.　　I kept my voice even. "Would you leave me unable to defend myself?"He swallowed convulsively, and the door shuddered, hinges protesting, as his hand tightened. Then henodded. "When you put it that way... I suppose we should get to work as soon as we can."I nodded, too, and we started toward the big house. We didn't hurry.　　I wondered what I could do that would have any hope of making a difference. I was a tiny bit special, inmy own way—if a having a supematurally thick skull could really be considered special. Was there anyuse that I could put that toward?　　"What would you say their biggest advantage is? Do they even have a weakness?"Edward didn't have to ask to know I meant the Volturi.　　"Alec and Jane are their greatest offense," he said emotionlessly, like we were talking of a basketballteam. "Their defensive players rarely see any real action.""Because Jane can burn you where you stand—mentally at least. What does Alec do? Didn't you oncesay he was even more dangerous than Jane?""Yes. In a way, he is the antidote to Jane. She makes you feel the worst pain imaginable. Alec, on theother hand, makes you feel nothing. Absolutely nothing. Sometimes, when the Volturi are feeling kind,they have Alec anesthetize someone before he is executed. If he has surrendered or pleased them insome other way.""Anesthetic? But how is that more dangerous than Jane?""Because he cuts off your senses altogether. No pain, but also no sight or sound or smell. Total sensorydeprivation. You are utterly alone in the blackness. You don't even feel it when they burn you."I shivered. Was this the best we could hope for? To not see or feel death when it came?　　"That would make him only equally as dangerous as Jane," Edward went on in the same detached voice,"in that they both can incapacitate you, make you into a helpless target. The difference between them islike the difference between Aro and me. Aro hears the mind of only one person at a time. Jane can onlyhurt the one object of her focus. I can hear everyone at the same time."I felt cold as I saw where he was going. "And Alec can incapacitate us all at the same time?" Iwhispered.　　"Yes," he said. "If he uses his gift against us, we will all stand blind and deaf until they get around tokillingus—maybe they'll simply burn us without bothering to tear us apart first. Oh, we could try to fight,but we'll be more likely to hurt one another than we would be to hurt one of them."We walked in silence for a few seconds.　　An idea was shaping itself in my head. Not very promising, but better than nothing.　　"Do you think Alec is a very good fighter?" I asked. "Aside from what he can do, I mean. If he had tofight without his gift. I wonder if he's ever even tried___"Edward glanced at me sharply. "What are you thinking?"I looked straight ahead. "Well, he probably can't do that to me, can he? If what he does is like Aro andJane and you. Maybe... if he's never really had to defend himself... and I learned a few tricks—""He's been with the Volturi for centuries," Edward cut me off, his voice abruptly panicked. He wasprobably seeing the same image in his head that I was: the Cullens standing helpless, senseless pillars onthekillingfield—all but me. I'd be the only one who could fight. "Yes, you're surely immune to his power,but you are still a newborn, Bella. I can't make you that strong a fighter in a few weeks. I'm sure he's hadtraining.""Maybe, maybe not. It's the one thing I can do that no one else can. Even if I can just distract him for awhile—" Could I last long enough to give the others a chance?　　"Please, Bella," Edward said through his teeth. "Let's not talk about this.""Be reasonable.""I will try to teach you what I can, but please don't make me think about you sacrificing yourself as adiversion—" He choked, and didn't finish.　　I nodded. I would keep my plans to myself, then. First Alec and then, if I was miraculously lucky enoughto win, Jane. If I could only even things out—remove the Volturi's overwhelming offensive advantage.　　Maybe then there was a chance.... My mind raced ahead. What if I was able to distract or even takethem out? Honestly, why would eitherJane or Alec ever have needed to learn battle skills? I couldn't imagine petulant little Jane surrenderingher advantage, even to learn.　　If I was able to kill them, what a difference that would make.　　"I have to learn everything. As much as you can possibly cram into my head in the next month," Imurmured.　　He acted as if I hadn't spoken.　　Who next, then? I might as well have my plans in order so that, if I did live past attacking Alec, therewould be no hesitation in my strike. I tried to think of another situation where my thick skull would giveme an advantage. I didn't know enough about what the others did. Obviously, fighters like the huge Felixwere beyond me. I could only try to give Emmett his fair fight there. I didn't know much about the rest ofthe Volturi guard, besides Demetri___My face was perfectly smooth as I considered Demetri. Without a doubt, he would be a fighter. Therewas no other way he could have survived so long, always at the spear point of any attack. And he mustalways lead, because he was their tracker—the best tracker in the world, no doubt. If there had beenone better, the Volturi would have traded up. Aro didn't surround himself with second best.　　If Demetri didn't exist, then we could run. Whoever was left of us, in any case. My daughter, warm inmy arms... Someone could run with her. Jacob or Rosalie, whoever was left.　　And... if Demetri didn't exist, then Alice and Jasper could be safe forever. Is that what Alice had seen?　　That part of our family could continue? The two of them, at the very least.　　Could I begrudge her that?　　"Demetri...," I said.　　"Demetri is mine," Edward said in a hard, tight voice. I looked at him quickly and saw that his expressionhad turned violent.　　"Why?" I whispered.　　He didn't answer at first. We were to the river when he finally murmured, "For Alice. It's the only thanksI can give her now for the last fifty years."So his thoughts were in line with mine.　　I heard Jacob's heavy paws thudding against the frozen ground. In seconds, he was pacing beside me,his dark eyes focused on Renesmee.　　I nodded to him once, then returned to my questions. There was so little time.　　"Edward, why do you think Alice told us to ask Eleazar about the Volturi? Has he been in Italy recentlyor something? What could he know?""Eleazar knows everything when it comes to the Volturi. I forgot you didn't know. He used to be one ofthem."I hissed involuntarily. Jacob growled beside me.　　"What?" I demanded, in my head picturing the beautiful dark-haired man at our wedding wrapped in along, ashy cloak.　　Edward's face was softer now—he smiled a little. "Eleazar is a very gentle person. He wasn't entirelyhappy withthe Volturi, but he respected the law and its need to be upheld. He felt he was working toward thegreater good. He doesn't regret his time with them. But when he found Carmen, he found his place in thisworld. They are very similar people, both very compassionate for vampires." He smiled again. "They metTanya and her sisters, and they never looked back. They are well suited to this lifestyle. If they'd neverfound Tanya, I imagine they would have eventually discovered a way to live without human blood on theirown."The pictures in my head were jarring. I couldn't make them match up. A compassionate Volturi soldier?　　Edward glanced at Jacob and answered a silent question. "No, he wasn't one of their warriors, so tospeak. He had a gift they found convenient."Jacob must have asked the obvious follow-up question.　　"He has an instinctive feel for the gifts of others—the extra abilities that some vampires have," Edwardtold him. "He could give Aro a general idea of what any given vampire was capable of just by being inproximity with him or her. This was helpful when the Volturi went into battle. He could warn them ifsomeone in the opposing coven had a skill that might give them some trouble. That was rare; it takesquite a skill to even inconvenience the Volturi for a moment. More often, the warning would give Aro thechance to save someone who might be useful to him. Eleazar's gift works even with humans, to an extent.　　He has to really concentrate with humans, though, because the latent ability is so nebulous. Aro wouldhave him test the people who wanted to join, to see if they had any potential. Aro was sorry to see himgo.""They let him go?" I asked. "Just like that?"His smile was darker now, a little twisted. 'The Volturi aren't supposed to be the villains, the way theyseem to you. They are the foundation of our peace and civilization. Each member of the guard chooses toserve them. It's quite prestigious; they all are proud to be there, not forced to be there."I scowled at the ground.　　"They're only alleged to be heinous and evil by the criminals, Bella.""We're not criminals."Jacob huffed in agreement.　　"They don't know that.""Do you really think we can make them stop and listen?"Edward hesitated just the tiniest moment and then shrugged. "If we find enough friends to stand besideus. Maybe."If. I suddenly felt the urgency of what we had before us today. Edward and I both started to movefaster, breaking into a run. Jacob caught up quickly.　　"Tanya shouldn't be too much longer," Edward said. "We need to be ready."How to be ready, though? We arranged and rearranged, thought and rethought. Renesmee in full view?　　Or hidden at first? Jacob in the room? Or outside? He'd told his pack to stay close but invisible. Shouldhe do the same?　　In the end, Renesmee, Jacob—in his human form again—and I waited around the corner from the frontdoor in the dining room, sitting at the big polished table. Jacob let me hold Renesmee; he wanted space incase he had to phase quickly.　　Though I was glad to have her in my arms, it made me feel useless. It reminded me that in a fight withmature vampires, I was no more than an easy target; I didn't need my hands free.　　I tried to remember Tanya, Kate, Carmen, and Eleazar from the wedding. Their faces were murky in myill-lit memories. I only knew they were beautiful, two blondes and two brunettes. I couldn't remember ifthere was any kindness in their eyes.　　Edward leaned motionlessly against the back window wall, staring toward the front door. It didn't looklike he was seeing the room in front of him.　　We listened to the cars zooming past out on the freeway, none of them slowing.　　Renesmee nestled into my neck, her hand against my cheek but no images in my head. She didn't havepictures for her feelings now.　　"What if they don't like me?" she whispered, and all our eyes flashed to her face.　　"Of course they'll—," Jacob started to say, but I silenced him with a look.　　'They don't understand you, Renesmee, because they've never met anyone like you," I told her, notwanting to lie to her with promises that might not come true. "Getting them to understand is the problem."She sighed, and in my head flashed pictures of all of us in one quick burst. Vampire, human, werewolf.　　She fit nowhere.　　"You're special, that's not a bad thing."She shook her head in disagreement. She thought of our strained faces and said, "This is my fault.""No," Jacob, Edward, and I all said at exactly the same time, but before we could argue further, weheard the sound we'd been waiting for: the slowing of an engine on the freeway, the tires moving frompavement to soft dirt.　　Edward darted around the corner to stand waiting by the door. Renesmee hid in my hair. Jacob and Istared at each other across the table, desperation on our faces.　　The car moved quickly through the woods, faster than Charlie or Sue drove. We heard it pull into themeadow and stop by the front porch. Four doors opened and closed. They didn't speak as theyapproached the door. Edward opened it before they could knock.　　"Edward!" a female voice enthused.　　"Hello, Tanya. Kate, Eleazar, Carmen."Three murmured hellos.　　"Carlisle said he needed to talk to us right away," the first voice said, Tanya. I could hear that they allwere still outside. I imagined Edward in the doorway, blocking their entrance. "What's the problem?　　Trouble with the werewolves?"Jacob rolled his eyes.　　"No," Edward said. "Our truce with the werewolves is stronger than ever."A woman chuckled.　　"Aren't you going to invite us in?" Tanya asked. And then she continued without waiting for an answer.　　"Where's Carlisle?""Carlisle had to leave."There was a short silence.　　"What's going on, Edward?" Tanya demanded.　　"If you could give me the benefit of the doubt for just a few minutes," he answered. "I have somethingdifficult to explain, and I'll need you to be open-minded until you understand.""Is Carlisle all right?" a male voice asked anxiously. Eleazar.　　"None of us is all right, Eleazar," Edward said, and then he patted something, maybe Eleazar's shoulder.　　"But physically, Carlisle is fine.""Physically?" Tanya asked sharply. "What do you mean?""I mean that my entire family is in very grave danger. But before I explain, I ask for your promise. Listento everything I say before you react. I am begging you to hear me out."A longer silence greeted his request. Through the strained hush, Jacob and I stared wordlessly at eachother. His russet lips paled.　　"We're listening," Tanya finally said. "We will hear it all before we judge.""Thank you, Tanya," Edward said fervently. "We wouldn't involve you in this if we had any otherchoice."Edward moved. We heard four sets of footsteps walk through the doorway.　　Someone sniffed. "I knew those werewolves were involved," Tanya muttered.　　"Yes, and they're on our side. Again."The reminder silenced Tanya.　　"Where's your Bella?" one of the other female voices asked. "How is she?""She'll join us shortly. She's well, thank you. She's taken to immortality with amazing finesse.""Tell us about the danger, Edward," Tanya said quietly. "We'll listen, and we'll be on your side, wherewe belong."Edward took a deep breath. "I'd like you to witness for yourselves first. Listen—in the other room.　　What do you hear?"It was quiet, and then there was movement.　　"Just listen first, please," Edward said.　　"A werewolf, I assume. I can hear his heart," Tanya said.　　"What else?" Edward asked.　　There was a pause.　　"What is that thrumming?" Kate or Carmen asked. "Is that... some kind of a bird?""No, but remember what you're hearing. Now, what do you smell? Besides the werewolf.""Is there a human here?" Eleazar whispered.　　"No," Tanya disagreed. "It's not human... but... closer to human than the rest of the scents here. What isthat, Edward? I don't think I've ever smelled that fragrance before.""You most certainly have not, Tanya. Please, please remember that this is something entirely new to you.　　Throw away your preconceived notions.""I promised you I would listen, Edward.""All right, then. Bella? Bring out Renesmee, please."My legs felt strangely numb, but I knew that feeling was all in my head. I forced myself not to hold back,not to move sluggishly, as I got to my feet and walked the few short feet to the corner. The heat fromJacob's body flamed close behind me as he shadowed my steps.　　I took one step into the bigger room and then froze, unable to force myself farther forward. Renesmeetook a deep breath and then peeped out from under my hair, her little shoulders tight, expecting a rebuff.　　I thought I'd prepared myself for their reaction. For accusations, for shouting, for the motionlessness ofdeep stress.　　Tanya skittered back four steps, her strawberry curls quivering, like a human confronted by a venomoussnake. Kate jumped back all the way to the front door and braced herself against the wall there. Ashocked hiss came from between her clenched teeth. Eleazar threw himself in front of Carmen in aprotective crouch.　　"Oh please" I heard Jacob complain under his breath.　　Edward put his arm around Renesmee and me. "You promised to listen," he reminded them.　　"Some things cannot be heard!" Tanya exclaimed. "How could you, Edward? Do you not know whatthis means?""We have to get out of here," Kate said anxiously, her hand on the doorknob.　　"Edward ..." Eleazar seemed beyond words.　　"Wait," Edward said, his voice harder now. "Remember what you hear, what you smell. Renesmee is notwhat you think she is.""There are no exceptions to this rule, Edward," Tanya snapped back.　　"Tanya," Edward said sharply, "you can hear her heartbeat! Stop and think about what that means.""Her heartbeat?" Carmen whispered, peering around Eleazar's shoulder.　　"She's not a full vampire child," Edward answered, directing his attention toward Carmen's less hostileexpression. "She is half-human."The four vampires stared at him like he was speaking a language none of them knew.　　"Hear me." Edward's voice shifted into a smooth velvet tone of persuasion. "Renesmee is one of a kind.　　I am her father. Not her creator—her biological father."Tanya's head was shaking, just a tiny movement. She didn't seem aware of it.　　"Edward, you can't expect us to—," Eleazar started to say.　　"Tell me another explanation that fits, Eleazar. You can feel the warmth of her body in the air. Blood runsin her veins, Eleazar. You can smell it.""How?" Kate breathed.　　"Bella is her biological mother," Edward told her. "She conceived, carried, and gave birth to Renesmeewhile she was still human. It nearly killed her. I was hard-pressed to get enough venom into her heart tosave her."Tve never heard of such a thing," Eleazar said. His shoulders were still stiff, his expression cold.　　"Physical relationships between vampires and humans are not common," Edward answered, a bit of darkhumor in his tone now. "Human survivors of such trysts are even less common. Wouldn't you agree,cousins?"Both Kate and Tanya scowled at him.　　"Come now, Eleazar. Surely you can see the resemblance."It was Carmen who responded to Edward's words. She stepped around Eleazar, ignoring hishalf-articulated warning, and walked carefully to stand right in front of me. She leaned down slightly,looking carefully into Renesmee's face.　　"You seem to have your mother's eyes," she said in a low, calm voice, "but your father's face." And then,as if she could not help herself, she smiled at Renesmee.　　Renesmee's answering smile was dazzling. She touched my face without looking away from Carmen.　　She imagined touching Carmen's face, wondering if that was okay.　　"Do you mind if Renesmee tells you about it herself?" I asked Carmen. I was still too stressed to speakabove a whisper. "She has a gift for explaining things."Carmen was still smiling at Renesmee. "Do you speak, little one?""Yes," Renesmee answered in her trilling high soprano. All of Tanya's family flinched at the sound of hervoice except for Carmen. "But I can show you more than I can tell you."She placed her little dimpled hand on Carmen's cheek.　　Carmen stiffened like an electric shock had run through her. Eleazar was at her side in an instant, hishands on her shoulders as if to yank her away.　　"Wait," Carmen said breathlessly, her unblinking eyes locked on Renesmee's.　　Renesmee "showed" Carmen her explanation for a long time. Edward's face was intent as he watchedwith Carmen, and I wished so much that I could hear what he heard, too. Jacob shifted his weightimpatiently behind me, and I knew he was wishing the same.　　"What's Nessie showing her?" he grumbled under his breath.　　"Everything," Edward murmured.　　Another minute passed, and Renesmee dropped her hand from Carmen's face. She smiled winningly atthe stunned vampire.　　"She really is your daughter, isn't she?" Carmen breathed, switching her wide topaz eyes to Edward'sface. "Such a vivid gift! It could only have come from a very gifted father.""Do you believe what she showed you?" Edward asked, his expression intense.　　"Without a doubt," Carmen said simply.　　Eleazar's face was rigid with distress. "Carmen!"Carmen took his hands into her own and squeezed them. "Impossible as it seems, Edward has told younothing but truth. Let the child show you."Carmen nudged Eleazar closer to me and then nodded at Renesmee. "Show him, mi querida"Renesmee grinned, clearly delighted with Carmen's acceptance, and touched Eleazar lightly on theforehead.　　"Ay caray!"hespit, and jerked away from her.　　"What did she do to you?" Tanya demanded, coming closer warily. Kate crept forward, too.　　"She's just trying to show you her side of the story," Carmen told him in a soothing voice.　　Renesmee frowned impatiently. "Watch, please," she commanded Eleazar. She stretched her hand out tohim and then left a few inches between her fingers and his face, waiting.　　Eleazar eyed her suspiciously and then glanced at Carmen for help. She nodded encouragingly. Eleazartook a deep breath and then leaned closer until his forehead touched her hand again.　　He shuddered when it began but held still this time, his eyes closed in concentration.　　"Ahh," he sighed when his eyes reopened a few minutes later. "I see."Renesmee smiled at him. He hesitated, then smiled a slightly unwilling smile in response.　　"Eleazar?" Tanya asked.　　"It's all true, Tanya. This is no immortal child. She's half-human. Come. See for yourself."In silence, Tanya took her turn standing warily before me, and then Kate, both showing shock as thatfirst image hit them with Renesmee's touch. But then, just like Carmen and Eleazar, they seemedcompletely won over as soon as it was done.　　I shot a glance at Edward's smooth face, wondering if it could really be so easy. His golden eyes wereclear, unshadowed. There was no deception in this, then.　　"Thank you for listening," he said quietly.　　"But there is the grave danger you warned us of," Tanya said. "Not directly from this child, I see, butsurely from the Volturi, then. How did they find out about her? When are they coming?"I was not surprised at her quick understanding. After all, what could possibly be a threat to a family asstrong as mine? Only the Volturi.　　"When Bella saw Irina that day in the mountains," Edward explained, "she had Renesmee with her."Kate hissed, her eyes narrowing to slits, "irina did this? To you? To Carlisle? Irina?""No," Tanya whispered. "Someone else ...""Alice saw her go to them," Edward said. I wondered if the others noticed the way he winced justslightly when he spoke Alice's name.　　"How could she do this thing?" Eleazar asked of no one.　　'Imagine if you had seen Renesmee only from a distance. If you had not waited for our explanation."Tanya's eyes tightened. "No matter what she thought... You are our family.""There's nothing we can do about Irina's choice now. It's too late. Alice gave us a month."Both Tanya's and Eleazar's heads cocked to one side. Kate's brow furrowed.　　"So long?" Eleazar asked.　　"They are all coming. That must take some preparation."Eleazar gasped. "The entire guard?""Not just the guard," Edward said, his jaw straining tight. "Aro, Caius, Marcus. Even the wives."Shock glazed over all their eyes.　　"Impossible," Eleazar said blankly.　　"I would have said the same two days ago," Edward said.　　Eleazar scowled, and when he spoke it was nearly a growl. "But that doesn't make any sense. Whywould they put themselves and the wives in danger?""It doesn't make sense from that angle. Alice said there was more to this than just punishment for whatthey think we've done. She thought you could help us.""More than punishment? But what else is there?" Eleazar started pacing, stalking toward the door andback again as if he were alone here, his eyebrows furrowed as he stared at the floor.　　"Where are the others, Edward? Carlisle and Alice and the rest?" Tanya asked.　　Edward's hesitation was almost unnoticeable. He answered only part of her question. "Looking forfriends who might help us."Tanya leaned toward him, holding her hands out in front of her. "Edward, no matter how many friendsyou gather, we can't help you win. We can only die with you. You must know that. Of course, perhapsthe four of us deserve that after what Irina has done now, after how we've failed you in the past—for hersake that time as well."Edward shook his head quickly. "We're not asking you to fight and die with us, Tanya. You knowCarlisle would never ask for that.""Then what, Edward?""We're just looking for witnesses. If we can make them pause, just for a moment. If they would let usexplain ..." He touched Renesmee's cheek; she grabbed his hand and held it pressed against her skin. "It'sdifficult to doubt our story when you see it for yourself."Tanya nodded slowly. "Do you think her past will matter to them so much?""Only as it foreshadows her future. The point of the restriction was to protect us from exposure, from theexcesses of children who could not be tamed.""I'm not dangerous at all," Renesmee interjected. I listened to her high, clear voice with new ears,imagining how she sounded to the others. "I never hurt Grandpa or Sue or Billy. I love humans. Andwolf-people like my Jacob." She dropped Edward's hand to reach back and pat Jacob's arm.　　Tanya and Kate exchanged a quick glance.　　"If Irina had not come so soon," Edward mused, "we could have avoided all of this. Renesmee grows atan unprecedented rate. By the time the month is past, shell have gained another half year ofdevelopment.""Well, that is something we can certainly witness," Carmen said in a decided tone. "We'll be able topromise that we've seen her mature ourselves. How could the Volturi ignore such evidence?"Eleazar mumbled, "How, indeed?" but he did not look up, and he continued pacing as if he were payingno attention at all.　　"Yes, we can witness for you," Tanya said. "Certainly that much. We will consider what more we mightdo.""Tanya," Edward protested, hearing more in her thoughts than there was in her words, "we don't expectyou to fight with us.""If the Volturi won't pause to listen to our witness, we cannot simply stand by," Tanya insisted. "Ofcourse, I should only speak for myself."Kate snorted. "Do you really doubt me so much, sister?"Tanya smiled widely at her. "It is a suicide mission, after all."Kate flashed a grin back and then shrugged nonchalantly. "I'm in.""I, too, will do what I can to protect the child," Carmen agreed. Then, as if she couldn't resist, she heldher arms out toward Renesmee. "May I hold you, bebe linda?"Renesmee reached eagerly toward Carmen, delighted with her new friend. Carmen hugged her close,murmuring to her in Spanish.　　It was like it had been with Charlie, and before that with all the Cullens. Renesmee was irresistible. Whatwas it about her that drew everyone to her, that made them willing even to pledge their lives in herdefense?　　For a moment I thought that maybe what we were attempting might be possible. Maybe Renesmeecould do the impossible and win over our enemies as she had our friends.　　And then I remembered that Alice had left us, and my hope vanished as quickly as it had appeared.
    Chapter 31 Talented
    TALENTED"What is the werewolves' part in this?" Tanya asked then, eyeing Jacob.　　Jacob spoke before Edward could answer. "If the Volturi won't stop to listen about Nessie, I meanRenesmee," he corrected himself, remembering that Tanya would not understand his stupid nickname,"we will stop them.""Very brave, child, but that would be impossible for more experienced fighters than you are.""You don't know what we can do."Tanya shrugged. "It is your own life, certainly, to spend as you choose."Jacob's eyes flickered to Renesmee—still in Carmen's arms with Kate hovering over them—and it waseasy to read the longing in them.　　"She is special, that little one," Tanya mused. "Hard to resist.""A very talented family," Eleazar murmured as he paced. His tempo was increasing; he flashed from thedoor to Carmen and back again every second. "A mind reader for a father, a shield for a mother, andthen whatever magic this extraordinary child has bewitched us with. I wonder if there is a name for whatshe does, or if it is the norm for a vampire hybrid. As if such a thing could ever be considered normal! Avampire hybrid, indeed!""Excuse me," Edward said in a stunned voice. He reached out and caught Eleazar's shoulder as he wasabout to turn again for the door. "What did you just call my wife?"Eleazar looked at Edward curiously, his manic pacing forgotten for the moment. "A shield, I think. She'sblocking me now, so I can't be sure."I stared at Eleazar, my brows furrowing in confusion. Shield? What did he mean about my blocking him?　　I was standing right here beside him, not defensive in any way.　　"A shield?" Edward repeated, bewildered.　　"Come now, Edward! If I can't get a read on her, I doubt you can, either. Can you hear her thoughtsright now?"Eleazar asked.　　"No," Edward murmured. "But I've never been able to do that. Even when she was human.""Never?" Eleazar blinked. "Interesting. That would indicate a rather powerful latent talent, if it wasmanifesting so clearly even before the transformation. I can't feel a way through her shield to get a senseof it at all. Yet she must be raw still—she's only a few months old." The look he gave Edward now wasalmost exasperated. "And apparently completely unaware of what she's doing. Totally unconscious.　　Ironic. Aro sent me all over the world searching for such anomalies, and you simply stumble across it byaccident and don't even realize what you have." Eleazar shook his head in disbelief.　　I frowned. "What are you talking about? How can I be a shield? What does that even mean?" All Icould picture in my head was a ridiculous medieval suit of armor.　　Eleazar leaned his head to one side as he examined me. "I suppose we were overly formal about it in theguard. In truth, categorizing talents is a subjective, haphazard business; every talent is unique, neverexactly the same thing twice. But you, Bella, are fairly easy to classify. Talents that are purely defensive,that protect some aspect of the bearer, are always called shields. Have you ever tested your abilities?　　Blocked anyone besides me and your mate?"It took me few seconds, despite how quickly my new brain worked, to organize my answer.　　"It only works with certain things," I told him. "My head is sort of... private. But it doesn't stop Jasperfrom being able to mess with my mood or Alice from seeing my future.""Purely a mental defense." Eleazar nodded to himself. "Limited, but strong.""Aro couldn't hear her," Edward interjected. "Though she was human when they met."Eleazar's eyes widened.　　"Jane tried to hurt me, but she couldn't," I said. "Edward thinks Demetri can't find me, and that Aleccan't bother me, either. Is that good?"Eleazar, still gaping, nodded. "Quite.""A shield!" Edward said, deep satisfaction saturating his tone. "I never thought of it that way. The onlyone I've ever met before was Renata, and what she did was so different."Eleazar had recovered slightly. "Yes, no talent ever manifests in precisely the same way, because no oneever thinks in exactly the same way.""Who's Renata? What does she do?" I asked. Renesmee was interested, too, leaning away fromCarmen so that she could see around Kate.　　"Renata is Aro's personal bodyguard," Eleazar told me. "A very practical kind of shield, and a verystrong one."I vaguely remembered a small crowd of vampires hovering close to Aro in his macabre tower, somemale, some female. I couldn't remember the women's faces in the uncomfortable, terrifying memory. Onemust have been Renata.　　"I wonder...," Eleazar mused. "You see, Renata is a powerful shield against a physical attack. Ifsomeone approaches her—or Aro, as she is always close beside him in a hostile situation—they findthemselves... diverted.　　There's a force around her that repels, though it's almost unnoticeable. You simply find yourself going adifferent direction than you planned, with a confused memory as to why you wanted to go that other wayin the first place. She can project her shield several meters out from herself. She also protects Caius andMarcus, too, when they have a need, but Aro is her priority.　　"What she does isn't actually physical, though. Like the vast majority of our gifts, it takes place inside themind. If she tried to keep you back, I wonder who would win?" He shook his head. "I've never heard ofAro's or Jane's gifts being thwarted.""Momma, you're special," Renesmee told me without any surprise, like she was commenting on the colorof my clothes.　　I felt disoriented. Didn't I already know my gift? I had my super-self-control that had allowed me to skipright over the horrifying newborn year. Vampires only had one extra ability at most, right?　　Or had Edward been correct in the beginning? Before Carlisle had suggested that my self-control couldbe something beyond the natural, Edward had thought my restraint was just a product of goodpreparation— focus and attitude,he'd declared.　　Which one had been right? Was there more I could do? A name and a category for what I was?　　"Can you project?" Kate asked interestedly.　　"Project?" I asked.　　"Push it out from yourself," Kate explained. "Shield someone besides yourself.""I don't know. I've never tried. I didn't know I should do that.""Oh, you might not be able to," Kate said quickly. "Heavens knows I've been working on it for centuriesand the best I can do is run a current over my skin."I stared at her, mystified.　　"Kate's got an offensive skill," Edward said. "Sort of like Jane."I flinched away from Kate automatically, and she laughed.　　"I'm not sadistic about it," she assured me. "It's just something that comes in handy during a fight."Kate's words were sinking in, beginning to make connections in my mind. Shield someone besidesyourself she'd said. As if there were some way for me to include another person in my strange, quirkysilent head.　　I remembered Edward cringing on the ancient stones of the Volturi castle turret. Though this was ahuman memory, it was sharper, more painful than most of the others—like it had been branded into thetissues of my brain.　　What if I could stop that from happening ever again? What if I could protect him? Protect Renesmee?　　What if there was even the faintest glimmer of a possibility that I could shield them, too?　　"You have to teach me what to do!" I insisted, unthinkingly grabbing Kate's arm. "You have to show mehow!"Kate winced at my grip. "Maybe—if you stop trying to crush my radius.""Oops! Sorry!""You're shielding, all right," Kate said. "That move should have about shocked your arm off. You didn'tfeelanything just now?""That wasn't really necessary, Kate. She didn't mean any harm," Edward muttered under his breath.　　Neither of us paid attention to him.　　"No, I didn't feel anything. Were you doing your electric current thing?""I was. Hmm. I've never met anyone who couldn't feel it, immortal or otherwise.""You said you project it? On your skin?"Kate nodded. "It used to be just in my palms. Kind of like Aro.""Or Renesmee," Edward interjected.　　"But after a lot of practice, I can radiate the current all over my body. It's a good defense. Anyone whotries to touch me drops like a human that's been Tasered. It only downs him for a second, but that's longenough."I was only half-listening to Kate, my thoughts racing around the idea that I might be able to protect mylittle family if I could just learn fast enough. I wished fervently that I might be good at this projecting thing,too, like I was somehow mysteriously good at all the other aspects of being a vampire. My human lifehad not prepared me for things that came naturally, and I couldn't make myself trust this aptitude to last.　　It felt like I had never wanted anything so badly before this; to be able to protect what I loved.　　Because I was so preoccupied, I didn't notice the silent exchange going on between Edward and Eleazaruntil it became a spoken conversation.　　"Can you think of even one exception, though?" Edward asked.　　I looked over to make sense of his comment and realized that everyone else was already staring at thetwo men. They were leaning toward each other intently, Edward's expression tight with suspicion,Eleazar's unhappy and reluctant.　　"I don't want to think of them that way," Eleazar said through his teeth. I was surprised at the suddenchange in the atmosphere.　　"If you're right—," Eleazar began again.　　Edward cut him off. "The thought was yours, not mine.""If I'm right... I can't even grasp what that would mean. It would change everything about the worldwe've created. It would change the meaning of my life. What I have been a part of.""Your intentions were always the best, Eleazar.""Would that even matter? What have I done? How many lives ..."Tanya put her hand on Eleazar's shoulder in a comforting gesture. "What did we miss, my friend? I wantto know so that I can argue with these thoughts. You've never done anything worth castigating yourselfthis way.""Oh, haven't I?" Eleazar muttered. Then he shrugged out from under her hand and began his pacingagain, faster even than before.　　Tanya watched him for half a second and then focused on Edward. "Explain."Edward nodded, his tense eyes following Eleazar as he spoke. "He was trying to understand why somany ofthe Volturi would come to punish us. It's not the way they do things. Certainly, we are the biggest maturecoven they've dealt with, but in the past other covens have joined to protect themselves, and they neverpresented much of a challenge despite their numbers. We are more closely bonded, and that's a factor,but not a huge one.　　"He was remembering other times that covens have been punished, for one thing or the other, and apattern occurred to him. It was a pattern that the rest of the guard would never have noticed, sinceEleazar was the one passing the pertinent intelligence privately to Aro. A pattern that only repeated everyother century or so.""What was this pattern?" Carmen asked, watching Eleazar as Edward was.　　"Aro does not often personally attend a punishing expedition," Edward said. "But in the past, when Arowanted something in particular, it was never long before evidence turned up proving that this coven orthat coven had committed some unpardonable crime. The ancients would decide to go along to watch theguard administer justice. And then, once the coven was all but destroyed, Aro would grant a pardon toone member whose thoughts, he would claim, were particularly repentant. Always, it would turn out thatthis vampire had the gift Aro had admired. Always, this person was given a place with the guard. Thegifted vampire was won over quickly, always so grateful for the honor. There were no exceptions.""It must be a heady thing to be chosen," Kate suggested.　　"Ha!" Eleazar snarled, still in motion.　　"There is one among the guard," Edward said, explaining Eleazar's angry reaction. "Her name is Chelsea.　　She has influence over the emotional ties between people. She can both loosen and secure these ties. Shecould make someone feel bonded to the Volturi, to want to belong, to want to please them___"Eleazar came to an abrupt halt. "We all understood why Chelsea was important. In a fight, if we couldseparate allegiances between allied covens, we could defeat them that much more easily. If we coulddistance the innocent members of a coven emotionally from the guilty, justice could be done withoutunnecessary brutality—the guilty could be punished without interference, and the innocent could bespared. Otherwise, it was impossible to keep the coven from fighting as a whole. So Chelsea wouldbreak the ties that bound them together. It seemed a great kindness to me, evidence of Aro's mercy. Idid suspect that Chelsea kept our own band more tightly knit, but that, too, was a good thing. It made usmore effective. It helped us coexist more easily."This clarified old memories for me. It had not made sense to me before how the guard obeyed theirmasters so gladly, with almost lover-like devotion.　　"How strong is her gift?" Tanya asked with an edge to her voice. Her gaze quickly touched on eachmember of her family.　　Eleazar shrugged. "I was able to leave with Carmen." And then he shook his head. "But anything weakerthan the bond between partners is in danger. In a normal coven, at least. Those are weaker bonds thanthose in our family, though. Abstaining from human blood makes us more civilized—lets us form truebonds of love. I doubt she could turn our allegiances, Tanya."Tanya nodded, seeming reassured, while Eleazar continued with his analysis.　　"I could only think that the reason Aro had decided to come himself, to bring so many with him, isbecause his goal is not punishment but acquisition," Eleazar said. "He needs to be there to control thesituation. But he needs the entire guard for protection from such a large, gifted coven. On the other hand,that leaves the other ancients unprotected in Volterra. Too risky—someone might try to take advantage.　　So they all come together. How else could he be sure to preserve the gifts that he wants? He must wantthem very badly," Eleazar mused.　　Edward's voice was low as a breath. "From what I saw of his thoughts last spring, Aro's never wantedanything more than he wants Alice."I felt my mouth fall open, remembering the nightmarish pictures I had imagined long ago: Edward andAlice in black cloaks with bloodred eyes, their faces cold and remote as they stood close as shadows,Aro's hands on theirs.... Had Alice seen this more recently? Had she seen Chelsea trying to strip awayher love for us, to bind her to Aro and Caius and Marcus?　　"Is that why Alice left?" I asked, my voice breaking on her name.　　Edward put his hand against my cheek. "I think it must be. To keep Aro from gaining the thing he wantsmost of all. To keep her power out of his hands."I heard Tanya and Kate murmuring in disturbed voices and remembered that they hadn't known aboutAlice.　　"He wants you, too," I whispered.　　Edward shrugged, his face suddenly a little too composed. "Not nearly as much. I can't really give himanything more than he already has. And of course that's dependent on his finding a way to force me to dohis will. He knows me, and he knows how unlikely that is." He raised one eyebrow sardonically.　　Eleazar frowned at Edward's nonchalance. "He also knows your weaknesses," Eleazar pointed out, andthen he looked at me.　　"It's nothing we need to discuss now," Edward said quickly.　　Eleazar ignored the hint and continued. "He probably wants your mate, too, regardless. He must havebeen intrigued by a talent that could defy him in its human incarnation."Edward was uncomfortable with this topic. I didn't like it, either. If Aro wanted me to do something—anything—all he had to do was threaten Edward and I would comply. And vice versa.　　Was death the lesser concern? Was it really capture we should fear?　　Edward changed the subject. "I think the Volturi were waiting for this—for some pretext. They couldn'tknow what form their excuse would come in, but the plan was already in place for when it did come.　　That's why Alice saw their decision before Irina triggered it. The decision was already made, just waitingfor the pretense of a justification.""If the Volturi are abusing the trust all immortals have placed in them...," Carmen murmured.　　"Does it matter?" Eleazar asked. "Who would believe it? And even if others could be convinced that theVolturi are exploiting their power, how would it make any difference? No one can stand against them.""Though some of us are apparently insane enough to try," Kate muttered.　　Edward shook his head. "You're only here to witness, Kate. Whatever Aro's goal, I don't think he'sready totarnish the Volturi's reputation for it. If we can take away his argument against us, he'll be forced to leaveus in peace.""Of course," Tanya murmured.　　No one looked convinced. For a few long minutes, nobody said anything.　　Then Iheard the sound of tires turning off the highway pavement onto the Cullens' dirt drive.　　"Oh crap, Charlie," I muttered. "Maybe the Denalis could hang out upstairs until—""No," Edward said in a distant voice. His eyes were far away, staring blankly at the door. "It's not yourfather." His gaze focused on me. "Alice sent Peter and Charlotte, afterall. Time to get ready for the nextround."
    Chapter 32 Company
    The Cullens' enormous house was more crowded with guests than anyone would assume could possiblybe comfortable. It only worked out because none of the visitors slept. Mealtimes were dicey, though.　　Our company cooperated as best they could. They gave Forks and La Push a wide berth, only huntingout of state; Edward was a gracious host, lending out his cars as needed without so much as a wince.　　The compromise made me very uncomfortable, though I tried to tell myself that they'd all be huntingsomewhere in the world, regardless.　　Jacob was even more upset. The werewolves existed to prevent the loss of human life, and here wasrampant murder being condoned barely outside the packs' borders. But under these circumstances, withRenesmee in acute danger, he kept his mouth shut and glared at the floor rather than the vampires.　　I was amazed at the easy acceptance the visiting vampires had for Jacob; the problems Edward hadanticipated had never materialized. Jacob seemed more or less invisible to them, not quite a person, butalso not food, either. They treated him the way people who are not animal-lovers treat the pets of theirfriends.　　Leah, Seth, Quil, and Embry were assigned to run with Sam for now, and Jacob would have happilyjoined them, except that he couldn't stand to be away from Renesmee, and Renesmee was busyfascinating the strange collection of Carlisle's friends.　　We'd replayed the scene of Renesmee's introduction to the Denali coven a half dozen times. First forPeter and Charlotte, whom Alice and Jasper had sent our way without giving them any explanation at all;like most people who knew Alice, they trusted her instructions despite the lack of information. Alice hadtold them nothing about which direction she and Jasper were heading. She'd made no promise to eversee them again in the future.　　Neither Peter nor Charlotte had ever seen an immortal child. Though they knew the rule, their negativereaction was not as powerful as the Denali vampires' had been at first. Curiosity had driven them to allowRenesmee's "explanation." And that was it. Now they were as committed to witnessing as Tanya's family.　　Carlisle had sent friends from Ireland and Egypt.　　The Irish clan arrived first, and they were surprisingly easy to convince. Siobhan—a woman of immensepresence whose huge body was both beautiful and mesmerizing as it moved in smooth undulations—wasthe leader, but she and her hard-faced mate, Liam, were long used to trusting the judgment of theirnewest coven member. Little Maggie, with her bouncy red curls, was not physically imposing like theother two, but she had a gift for knowing when she was being lied to, and her verdicts were nevercontested. Maggie declared that Edward spoke the truth, and so Siobhan and Liam accepted our storyabsolutely before even touching Renesmee.　　Amun and the other Egyptian vampires were another story. Even after two younger members of hiscoven, Benjamin and Tia, had been convinced by Renesmee's explanation, Amun refused to touch herand ordered his coven to leave. Benjamin—an oddly cheerful vampire who looked barely older than aboy and seemed both utterly confident and utterly careless at the same time—persuaded Amun to staywith a few subtle threats about disbanding their alliance. Amun stayed, but continued to refuse to touchRenesmee, and would not allow his mate, Kebi, to touch her, either. It seemed an unlikelygrouping—though the Egyptians all looked so alike, with their midnight hair and olive-toned pallor, thatthey easily could have passed for a biological family. Amun was the senior member and the outspokenleader. Kebi never strayed farther away from Amun than his shadow, and I never heard her speak asingle word. Tia, Benjamin's mate, was a quiet woman as well, though when she did speak there wasgreat insight and gravity to everything she said. Still, it was Benjamin whom they all seemed to revolvearound, as if he had some invisible magnetism the others depended upon for their balance. I saw Eleazarstaring at the boy with wide eyes and assumed Benjamin had a talent that drew the others to him.　　"It's not that," Edward told me when we were alone that night. "His gift is so singular that Amun isterrified of losing him. Much like we had planned to keep Renesmee from Aro's knowledge"—hesighed—"Amun has been keeping Benjamin from Aro's attention. Amun created Benjamin, knowing hewould be special.""What can he do?""Something Eleazar's never seen before. Something I've never heard of. Something that even your shieldwould do nothing against." He grinned his crooked smile at me. "He can actually influence the elements—earth, wind, water, and fire. True physical manipulation, no illusion of the mind. Benjamin's stillexperimenting with it, and Amun tries to mold him into a weapon. But you see how independentBenjamin is. He won't be used.""You like him," I surmised from the tone of his voice.　　"He has a very clear sense of right and wrong. I like his attitude."Amun's attitude was something else, and he and Kebi kept to themselves, though Benjamin and Tia werewell on their way to being fast friends with both the Denali and the Irish covens. We hoped that Carlisle'sreturn would ease the remaining tension with Amun.　　Emmett and Rose sent individuals—any nomad friends of Carlisle's that they could track down.　　Garrett came first—a tall, rangy vampire with eager ruby eyes and long sandy hair he kept tied backwith a leather thong—and it was apparent immediately that he was an adventurer. I imagined that wecould have presentedhim with any challenge and he would have accepted, just to test himself. He fell in quickly with the Denalisisters, asking endless questions about their unusual lifestyle. I wondered if vegetarianism was anotherchallenge he would try, just to see if he could do it.　　Mary and Randall also came—friends already, though they did not travel together. They listened toRenesmee's story and stayed to witness like the others. Like the Denalis, they considered what theywould do if the Volturi did not pause for explanations. All three of the nomads toyed with the idea ofstanding with us.　　Of course, Jacob got more surly with each new addition. He kept his distance when he could, and whenhe couldn't he grumbled to Renesmee that someone was going to have to provide an index if anyoneexpected him to keep all the new bloodsuckers1names straight.*Carlisle and Esme returned a week after they had gone, Emmett and Rosalie just a few days later, andall of us felt better when they were home. Carlisle brought one more friend home with him, though friendmight have been the wrong term. Alistair was a misanthropic English vampire who counted Carlisle as hisclosest acquaintance, though he could hardly stand a visit more than once a century. Alistair very muchpreferred to wander alone, and Carlisle had called in a lot of favors to get him here. He shunned allcompany, and it was clear he didn't have any admirers in the gathered covens.　　The brooding dark-haired vampire took Carlisle at his word about Renesmee's origins, refusing, likeAmun, to touch her. Edward told Carlisle, Esme, and me that Alistair was afraid to be here, but moreafraid of not knowing the outcome. He was deeply suspicious of all authority, and therefore naturallysuspicious of the Volturi. What was happening now seemed to confirm all his fears.　　"Of course, now they'll know i was here," we heard him grumble to himself in the attic—his preferredspot to sulk. "No way to keep it from Aro at this point. Centuries on the run, that's what this will mean.　　Everyone Carlisle's talked to in the last decade will be on their list. I can't believe I got myself sucked intothis mess. What a fine way to treat your friends."But if he was right about having to run from the Volturi, at least he had more hope of doing that than therest of us. Alistair was a tracker, though not nearly as precise and efficient as Demetri. Alistair just felt anelusive pull toward whatever he was seeking. But that pull would be enough to tell him which direction torun—the opposite direction from Demetri.　　And then another pair of unexpected friends arrived—unexpected, because neither Carlisle nor Rosaliehad been able to contact the Amazons.　　"Carlisle," the taller of the two very tall feline women greeted him when they arrived. Both of themseemed as if they'd been stretched—long arms and legs, long fingers, long black braids, and long faceswith long noses. They wore nothing but animal skins—hide vests and tight-fitting pants that laced on thesides with leather ties. It wasn't just their eccentric clothes that made them seem wild but everything aboutthem, from their restless crimson eyes to their sudden, darting movements. I'd never met any vampiresless civilized.　　But Alice had sent them, and that was interesting news, to put it mildly. Why was Alice in SouthAmerica? Justbecause she'd seen that no one else would be able to get in touch with the Amazons?　　"Zafrina and Senna! But Where's Kachiri?" Carlisle asked. Tve never seen you three apart.""Alice told us we needed to separate," Zafrina answered in the rough, deep voice that matched her wildappearance. "It's uncomfortable to be away from each other, but Alice assured us that you needed ushere, while she very much needed Kachiri somewhere else. That's all she would tell us, except that therewas a great hurry... ?" Zafrina's statement trailed off into a question, and—with the tremor of nerves thatnever went away no matter how often I did this—I brought Renesmee out to meet them.　　Despite their fierce appearance, they listened very calmly to our story, and then allowed Renesmee toprove the point. They were every bit as taken with Renesmee as any of the other vampires, but I couldn'thelp worrying as I watched their swift, jerky movements so close beside her. Senna was always nearZafrina, never speaking, but it wasn't the same as Amun and Kebi. Kebi's manner seemed obedient;Senna and Zafrina were more like two limbs of one organism—Zafrina just happened to be themouthpiece.　　The news about Alice was oddly comforting. Clearly, she was on some obscure mission of her own asshe avoided whatever Aro had planned for her.　　Edward was thrilled to have the Amazons with us, because Zafrina was enormously talented; her giftcould make a very dangerous offensive weapon. Not that Edward was asking for Zafrina to side with usin the battle, but if the Volturi did not pause when they saw our witnesses, perhaps they would pause fora different kind of scene.　　"It's a very straightforward illusion," Edward explained when it turned out that I couldn't see anything, asusual. Zafrina was intrigued and amused by my immunity—something she'd never encounteredbefore—and she hovered restlessly while Edward described what I was missing. Edward's eyesunfocused slightly as he continued. "She can make most people see whatever she wants them tosee—see that, and nothing else. For example, right now I would appear to be alone in the middle of arain forest. It's so clear I might possibly believe it, except for the fact that I can still feel you in my arms."Zafrina's lips twitched into her hard version of a smile. A second later, Edward's eyes focused again, andhe grinned back.　　"Impressive," he said.　　Renesmee was fascinated with the conversation, and she reached out fearlessly toward Zafrina.　　"Can I see?" she asked.　　"What would you like to see?" Zafrina asked.　　"What you showed Daddy."Zafrina nodded, and I watched anxiously as Renesmee's eyes stared blankly into space. A second later,Renesmee's dazzling smile lit up her face.　　"More," she commanded.　　After that, it was hard to keep Renesmee away from Zafrina and her pretty pictures. I worried,because I was quite sure that Zafrina was able to create images that were not pretty at all. But throughRenesmee's thoughts Icould see Zafrina's visions for myself—they were as clear as any of Renesmee's own memories, like theywere real—and thus judge for myself whether they were appropriate or not.　　Though I didn't give her up easily, I had to admit it was a good thing Zafrina was keeping Renesmeeentertained. I needed my hands. I had so much to learn, both physically and mentally, and the time wasso short.　　My first attempt at learning to fight did not go well.　　Edward had me pinned in about two seconds. But instead of letting me wrestle my way free—which Iabsolutely could have—he'd leaped up and away from me. I knew immediately that something waswrong; he was still as stone, staring across the meadow we were practicing in.　　Tm sorry, Bella," he said.　　"No, I'm fine," I said. "Let's go again.""I can't.""What do you mean, you can't? We just started."He didn't answer.　　"Look, I know I'm no good at this, but I can't get better if you don't help me."He said nothing. Playfully, I sprang at him. He made no defense at all, and we both fell to the ground. Hewas motionless as I pressed my lips to his jugular.　　"I win," I announced.　　His eyes narrowed, but he said nothing.　　"Edward? What's wrong? Why won't you teach me?"A full minute passed before he spoke again.　　"I just can't... bear it. Emmett and Rosalie know as much as I do. Tanya and Eleazar probably knowmore. Ask someone else.""That's not fair! You're good at this. You helped Jasper before—you fought with him and all the others,too. Why not me? What did I do wrong?"He sighed, exasperated. His eyes were dark, barely any gold to lighten the black.　　"Looking at you that way, analyzing you as a target. Seeing all the ways I can kill you .. ." He flinched. "Itjust makes it too real for me. We don't have so much time that it will really make a difference who yourteacher is. Anyone can teach you the fundamentals."I scowled.　　He touched my pouting lower lip and smiled. "Besides, it's unnecessary. The Volturi will stop. They willbe made to understand.""But if they don't! I need to learn this.""Find another teacher."That was not our last conversation on the subject, but I never swayed him an inch from his decision.　　Emmett was more than willing to help, though his teaching felt to me a lot like revenge for all the lostarm-wrestling matches. If I could still bruise, I would have been purple from head to toe. Rose, Tanya,and Eleazar all were patient and supportive. Their lessons reminded me of Jasper's fighting instructions tothe others last June, though those memories were fuzzy and indistinct. Some of the visitors found myeducation entertaining, and some even offered assistance. The nomad Garrett took a few turns—he wasa surprisingly good teacher; he interacted so easily with others in general that I wondered how he'd neverfound a coven. I even fought once with Zafrina while Renesmee watched from Jacob's arms. I learnedseveral tricks, but I never asked for her help again. In truth, though I liked Zafrina very much and I knewshe wouldn't really hurt me, the wild woman scared me to death.　　I learned many things from my teachers, but I had the sense that my knowledge was still impossiblybasic. I had no idea how many seconds I would last against Alec and Jane. I only prayed that it would belong enough to help.　　Every minute of the day that I wasn't with Renesmee or learning to fight, I was in the backyard workingwith Kate, trying to push my internal shield outside of my own brain to protect someone else. Edwardencouraged me in this training. I knew he hoped I would find a way of contributing that satisfied me whilealso keeping me out of the line of fire.　　It was just so hard. There was nothing to get a hold of, nothing solid to work with. I had only my ragingdesire to be of use, to be able to keep Edward, Renesmee, and as much of my family as possible safewith me. Over and over I tried to force the nebulous shield outside of myself, with only faint, sporadicsuccess. It felt like I was wrestling to stretch an invisible rubber band—a band that would change fromconcrete tangibility into insubstantial smoke at any random moment.　　Only Edward was willing to be our guinea pig—to receive shock after shock from Kate while I grappledincompetently with the insides of my head. We worked for hours at a time, and I felt like I should becovered in sweat from the exertion, but of course my perfect body didn't betray me that way. Myweariness was all mental.　　It killed me that it was Edward who had to suffer, my arms wrapped uselessly around him while hewinced over and over from Kate's low" setting. I tried as hard as I could to push my shield around usboth; every now and then I would get it, and then it would slip away again.　　I hated this practice, and I wished that Zafrina would help instead of Kate. Then all Edward would haveto do was look at Zafrina's illusions until I could stop him from seeing them. But Kate insisted that Ineeded better motivation—by which she meant my hatred of watching Edward's pain. I was beginning todoubt her assertion from the first day we'd met—that she wasn't sadistic about the use of her gift. Sheseemed to be enjoying herself to me.　　"Hey," Edward said cheerfully, trying to hide any evidence of distress in his voice. Anything to keep mefrom fighting practice. "That one barely stung. Good job, Bella."I took a deep breath, trying to grasp exactly what I'd done right, i tested the elastic band, struggling toforce it to remain solid as I stretched it away from me.　　"Again, Kate," I grunted through my clenched teeth.　　Kate pressed her palm to Edward's shoulder.　　He sighed in relief. "Nothing that time."She raised an eyebrow. "That wasn't low, either.""Good," I huffed.　　"Get ready," she told me, and reached out to Edward again.　　This time he shuddered, and a low breath hissed between his teeth.　　"Sorry! Sorry! Sorry!" I chanted, biting my lip. Why couldn't I get this right?　　"You're doing an amazing job, Bella," Edward said, pulling me tight against him. "You've really only beenworking at this for a few days and you're already projecting sporadically. Kate, tell her how well she'sdoing."Kate pursed her lips. "I don't know. She's obviously got tremendous ability, and we're only beginning totouch it. She can do better, I'm sure. She's just lacking incentive."I stared at her in disbelief, my lips automatically curling back from my teeth. How could she think Ilacked motivation with her shocking Edward right here in front of me?　　I heard murmurs from the audience that had grown steadily as I practiced—only Eleazar, Carmen, andTanya at first, but then Garrett had wandered over, then Benjamin and Tia, Siobhan and Maggie, andnow even Alistair was peering down from a window on the third story. The spectators agreed withEdward; they thought I was already doing well.　　"Kate...," Edward said in a warning voice as some new course of action occurred to her, but she wasalready in motion. She darted along the curve of the river to where Zafrina, Senna, and Renesmee werewalking slowly, Renesmee's hand in Zafrina's as they traded pictures back and forth. Jacob shadowedthem from a few feet behind.　　"Nessie," Kate said—the newcomers had quickly picked up the irritating nickname, "would you like tocome help your mother?""No," I half-snarled.　　Edward hugged me reassuringly. I shook him off just as Renesmee flitted across the yard to me, withKate, Zafrina, and Senna right behind her.　　"Absolutely not, Kate," I hissed.　　Renesmee reached for me, and I opened my arms automatically. She curled into me, pressing her headinto the hollow beneath my shoulder.　　"But Momma, I want to help," she said in a determined voice. Her hand rested against my neck,reinforcing her desire with images of the two of us together, a team.　　"No," I said, quickly backing away. Kate had taken a deliberate step in my direction, her hand stretchedtoward us.　　"Stay away from us, Kate," I warned her.　　"No." She began stalking forward. She smiled like a hunter cornering her prey.　　I shifted Renesmee so that she was clinging to my back, still backing away at a pace that matchedKate's. Now my hands were free, and if Kate wanted to keep her hands attached to her wrists, she'dbetter keep her distance.　　Kate probably didn't understand, never having known for herself the passion of a mother for her child.　　She mustnot have realized just how far past too far she'd already gone. I was so furious that my vision took on astrange reddish tint, and my tongue tasted like burning metal. The strength I usually worked to keeprestrained flowed through my muscles, and I knew I could crush her into diamond-hard rubble if shepushed me to it.　　The rage brought every aspect of my being into sharper focus. I could even feel the elasticity of myshield more exactly now—feel that it was not a band so much as a layer, a thin film that covered me fromhead to toe. With the anger rippling through my body, I had a better sense of it, a tighter hold on it. Istretched it around myself, out from myself, swaddling Renesmee completely inside it, just in case Kategot past my guard.　　Kate took another calculated step forward, and a vicious snarl ripped up my throat and through myclenched teeth.　　"Be careful, Kate," Edward cautioned.　　Kate took another step, and then made a mistake even someone as inexpert as I could recognize. Just ashort leap away from me, she looked away, turning her attention from me to Edward.　　Renesmee was secure on my back; I coiled to spring.　　"Can you hear anything from Nessie?" Kate asked him, her voice calm and easy.　　Edward darted into the space between us, blocking my line to Kate.　　"No, nothing at all," he answered. "Now give Bella some space to calm down, Kate. You shouldn't goadher like that. I know she doesn't seem her age, but she's only a few months old.""We don't have time to do this gently, Edward. We're going to have to push her. We only have a fewweeks, and she's got the potential to—""Back off for a minute, Kate."Kate frowned but took Edward's warning more seriously than she'd taken mine.　　Renesmee's hand was on my neck; she was remembering Kate's attack, showing me that no harm wasmeant, that Daddy was in on it....　　This did not pacify me. The spectrum of light I saw still seemed tainted with crimson. But I was in bettercontrol of myself, and I could see the wisdom of Kate's words. The anger helped me. I would learnfaster under pressure.　　That didn't mean I liked it.　　"Kate," I growled. I rested my hand on the small of Edward's back. I could still feel my shield like astrong, flexible sheet around Renesmee and me. I pushed it farther, forcing it around Edward. There wasno sign of a flaw in the stretchy fabric, no threat of a tear. I panted with the effort, and my words cameout sounding breathless rather than furious. "Again," I said to Kate. "Edward only."She rolled her eyes but flitted forward and pressed her palm to Edward's shoulder.　　"Nothing," Edward said. I heard the smile in his voice.　　"And now?" Kate asked.　　"Stillnothing.""And now?" This time, there was the sound of strain in her voice.　　"Nothing at all."Kate grunted and stepped away.　　"Can you see this?" Zafrina asked in her deep, wild voice, staring intently at the three of us. Her Englishwas strangely accented, her words pulling up in unexpected places.　　"I don't see anything I shouldn't," Edward said.　　"And you, Renesmee?" Zafrina asked.　　Renesmee smiled at Zafrina and shook her head.　　My fury had almost entirely ebbed, and I clenched my teeth together, panting faster as I pushed outagainst the elastic shield; it felt like it was getting heavier the longer I held it. It pulled back, dragginginward.　　"No one panic," Zafrina warned the little group watching me. "I want to see how far she can extend."There was a shocked gasp from everyone there—Eleazar, Carmen, Tanya, Garrett, Benjamin, Tia,Siobhan, Maggie—everyone but Senna, who seemed prepared for whatever Zafrina was doing. Theothers' eyes were blank, their expressions anxious.　　"Raise your hand when you get your sight back," Zafrina instructed. "Now, Bella. See how many youcan shield."My breath came out in a huff. Kate was the closest person to me besides Edward and Renesmee, buteven she was about ten feet away. I locked my jaw and shoved, trying to heave the resisting, resilientsafeguard farther from myself. Inch by inch I drove it toward Kate, fighting the reaction that fought backwith every fraction that I gained. I only watched Kate's anxious expression while I worked, and Igroaned quietly with relief when her eyes blinked and focused. She raised her hand.　　"Fascinating!" Edward murmured under his breath. "It's like one-way glass. I can read everything they'rethinking, but they can't reach me behind it. And I can hear Renesmee, though I couldn't when I was onthe outside. I'll bet Kate could shock me now, because she's underneath the umbrella. I still can't hearyou... hmmm. How does that work? I wonder if..."He continued to mumble to himself, but I couldn't listen to the words. I ground my teeth together,struggling to force the shield out to Garrett, who was closest to Kate. His hand came up.　　"Very good," Zafrina complimented me. "Now—"But she'd spoken too soon; with a sharp gasp, I felt my shield recoil like a rubber band stretched too far,snapping back into its original shape. Renesmee, experiencing for the first time the blindness Zafrina hadconjured for the others, trembled against my back. Wearily, I fought back against the elastic pull, forcingthe shield to include her again.　　"Can I have a minute?" I panted. Since I'd become a vampire, I hadn't felt the need to rest even oncebefore this moment. It was unnerving to feel so drained and yet so strong at the same time.　　"Of course," Zafrina said, and the spectators relaxed as she let them see again.　　"Kate," Garrett called as the others murmured and drifted slightly away, disturbed by the moment ofblindness; vampires were not used to feeling vulnerable. The tall, sandy-haired Garrett was the onlynon-gifted immortal whoseemed drawn to my practice sessions. I wondered what the lure was for the adventurer.　　"I wouldn't, Garrett," Edward cautioned.　　Garrett continued toward Kate despite the warning, his lips pursed in speculation. "They say you can puta vampire flat on his back.""Yes," she agreed. Then, with a sly smile, she wiggled her fingers playfully at him. "Curious?"Garrett shrugged. "That's something I've never seen. Seems like it might be a bit of an exaggeration___""Maybe," Kate said, her face suddenly serious. "Maybe it only works on the weak or the young. I'm notsure. You look strong, though. Perhaps you could withstand my gift." She stretched her hand out to him,palm up—a clear invitation. Her lips twitched, and I was pretty sure her grave expression was an attemptto hustle him.　　Garrett grinned at the challenge. Very confidently, he touched her palm with his index finger.　　And then, with a loud gasp, his knees buckled and he keeled over backward. His head hit a piece ofgranite with a sharp cracking noise. It was shocking to watch. My instincts recoiled against seeing animmortal incapacitated that way; it was profoundly wrong.　　"I told you so," Edward muttered.　　Garrett's eyelids trembled for a few seconds, and then his eyes opened wide. He stared up at thesmirking Kate, and a wondering smile lit his face.　　"Wow," he said.　　"Did you enjoy that?" she asked skeptically.　　"I'm not crazy," he laughed, shaking his head as he got slowly to his knees, "but that was suresomething!""That's what I hear."Edward rolled his eyes.　　And then there was a low commotion from the front yard. I heard Carlisle speaking over a babble ofsurprised voices.　　"Did Alice send you?" he asked someone, his voice unsure, slightly upset.　　Another unexpected guest?　　Edward darted into the house and most of the others imitated him. I followed more slowly, Renesmeestill perched on my back. I would give Carlisle a moment. Let him warm up the new guest, prepare himor her or them for the idea of what was coming.　　I pulled Renesmee into my arms as I walked cautiously around the house to enter through the kitchendoor, listening to what I couldn't see.　　"No one sent us," a deep whispery voice answered Carlisle's question. I was immediately reminded ofthe ancient voices of Aro and Caius, and I froze just inside the kitchen.　　I knew the front room was crowded—almost everyone had gone in to see the newest visitors—butthere was barely any noise. Shallow breathing, that was all.　　Carlisle's voice was wary as he responded. "Then what brings you here now?""Word travels," a different voice answered, just as feathery as the first. "We heard hints that Volturi weremoving against you. There were whispers that you would not stand alone. Obviously, the whispers weretrue. This is an impressive gathering.""We are not challenging the Volturi," Carlisle answered in a strained tone. "There has been amisunderstanding, that is all. A very serious misunderstanding, to be sure, but one we're hoping to clearup. What yousee are witnesses. We just need the Volturi to listen. We didn't—""We don't care what they say you did," the first voice interrupted. "And we don't care if you broke thelaw.""No matter how egregiously," the second inserted.　　"We've been waiting a millennium and a half for the Italian scum to be challenged," said the first. "If thereis any chance theywill fall, we will be here to see it.""Or even to help defeat them," the second added. They spoke ina smooth tandem, their voices so similarthat less sensitive ears would assume there was only one speaker. "If we think you havea chance ofsuccess.""Bella?"Edward called to me ina hard voice. "Bring Renesmee here, please. Maybe we should test ourRomanian visitors' claims."It helped to know that probably half of the vampires in the other room would come to Renesmee'sdefense if these Romanians were upset by her. I didn't like the sound of their voices, or the dark menacein their words. As I walked into the room, I could see that I was not alone in that assessment. Most ofthe motionless vampires glared with hostile eyes, anda few—Carmen, Tanya, Zafrina, andSenna—repositioned themselves subtly into defensive poses between the newcomers and Renesmee.　　The vampires at the door were both slight and short, one dark-haired and the other with hair so ashyblond that it looked pale gray. They had the same powdery look to their skin as the Volturi, though Ithought it was not so pronounced. I couldn't be sure about that, as I had never seen the Volturi exceptwith human eyes; I could not make a perfect comparison. Their sharp, narrow eyes were dark burgundy,with no milky film. They wore very simple black clothes that could pass as modern but hinted at olderdesigns.　　The dark one grinned when I came into view. "Well, well, Carlisle. You have been naughty, haven'tyou?""She's not what you think, Stefan.""And we don't care either way," the blonde responded. "As we said before.""Then you're welcome to observe, Vladimir, but it is definitely not our plan to challenge the Volturi, aswe said before.""Then we'lljust cross our fingers," Stefan began.　　"And hope we get lucky," finished Vladimir.　　In the end, we had pulled together seventeen witnesses—the Irish, Siobhan, Liam, and Maggie; theEgyptians, Amun, Kebi, Benjamin, and Tia; the Amazons, Zafrina and Senna; the Romanians, Vladimirand Stefan; and thenomads, Charlotte and Peter, Garrett, Alistair, Mary, and Randall—to supplement our family of eleven.　　Tanya, Kate, Eleazar, and Carmen insisted on being counted as part of our family.　　Aside from the Volturi, it was probably the largest friendly gathering of mature vampires in immortalhistory.　　We all were beginning to be a little bit hopeful. Even I couldn't help it.Renesmee had won over somany in such a brief time.The Volturi only had to listen for just the tiniest second___The lasttwo surviving Romanians—focused only on their bitter resentment of the ones who hadoverthrown their empire fifteen hundred years earlier—took everything in stride. They would not touchRenesmee, but they showed no aversion to her. They seemed mysteriously delighted by our alliance withthe werewolves.They watched me practice my shield with Zafrina and Kate, watched Edward answerunspoken questions, watched Benjaminpull geysers of water from the river or sharp gusts of wind fromthe still air with just his mind, and their eyes glowed with their fierce hope that the Volturi had finally mettheir match.　　We did not hope for the same things, but we all hoped.
    Chapter 33 Forgery
    "Charlie, we've still got that strictly need-to-know company situation going. I know it's been more than aweek since you saw Renesmee, but a visit is just not a good idea right now. How about I bringRenesmee over to see you?"Charlie was quiet for so long that I wondered if he heard the strain beneath my fagade.　　But then he muttered, "Need to know, ugh" and I realized it was just his wariness of the supernaturalthat made him slow to respond.　　"Okay, kid," Charlie said. "Can you bring her over this morning? Sue's bringing me lunch. She's just ashorrified by my cooking as you were when you first showed up."Charlie laughed and then sighed for the old days.　　"This morning will be perfect." The sooner the better. I'd already put this off too long.　　"Is Jake coming with you guys?"Though Charlie didn't know anything about werewolf imprinting, no one could be oblivious to theattachment between Jacob and Renesmee.　　"Probably." There was no way Jacob would voluntarily miss an afternoon with Renesmee sansbloodsuckers.　　"Maybe I should invite Billy, too," Charlie mused. "But... hmm. Maybe another time."I was only half paying attention to Charlie—enough to notice the strange reluctance in his voice when hespoke of Billy, but not enough to worry what that was about. Charlie and Billy were grown-ups; if therewas something going on between them, they could figure it out for themselves. I had too many moreimportant things to obsess over.　　"See you in a few," I told him, and hung up.　　This trip was about more than protecting my father from the twenty-seven oddly matched vampires—who all had sworn not to kill anyone in a three-hundred-mile radius, but still... Obviously, no humanbeing should get anywhere near this group. This was the excuse I'd given Edward: I was takingRenesmee to Charlie so that he wouldn't decideto come here. It was a good reason for leaving the house, but not my real reason at all.　　"Why can't we take your Ferrari?" Jacob complained when he met me in the garage. I was already inEdward's Volvo with Renesmee.　　Edward had gotten around to revealing my after car; as he'd suspected, I had not been capable ofshowing the appropriate enthusiasm. Sure, it was pretty and fast, but I liked to run.　　"Too conspicuous," I answered. "We could go on foot, but that would freak Charlie out."Jacob grumbled but got into the front seat. Renesmee climbed from my lap to his.　　"How are you?" I asked him as I pulled out of the garage.　　"How do you think?" Jacob asked bitingly. "I'm sick of all these reeking bloodsuckers." He saw myexpression and spoke before I could answer. "Yeah, I know, I know. They're the good guys, they'rehere to help, they're going to save us all. Etcetera, etcetera. Say what you want, I still think Dracula Oneand Dracula Two are creep-tacular."I had to smile. The Romanians weren't my favorite guests, either. "I don't disagree with you there."Renesmee shook her head but said nothing; unlike the rest of us, she found the Romanians strangelyfascinating. She'd made the effort to speak to them aloud since they would not let her touch them. Herquestion was about their unusual skin and, though I was afraid they might be offended, I was kind of gladshe'd asked. I was curious, too.　　They hadn't seemed upset by her interest. Maybe a little rueful.　　"We sat still for a very long time, child," Vladimir had answered, with Stefan nodding along but notcontinuing Vladimir's sentences as he often did. "Contemplating our own divinity. It was a sign of ourpower that everything came to us. Prey, diplomats, those seeking our favor. We sat on our thrones andthought ourselves gods. We didn't notice for a long time that we were changing—almost petrifying. Isuppose the Volturi did us one favor when they burned our castles. Stefan and I, at least, did notcontinue to petrify. Now the Volturi's eyes are filmed with dusty scum, but ours are bright. I imagine thatwill give us an advantage when we gouge theirs from their sockets."I tried to keep Renesmee away from them after that.　　"How long do we get to hang out with Charlie?" Jacob asked, interrupting my thoughts. He was visiblyrelaxing as we pulled away from the house and all its new inmates. It made me happy that I didn't reallycount as a vampire to him. I was still just Bella.　　"For quite a while, actually."The tone of my voice caught his attention.　　"Is something going on here besides visiting your dad?""Jake, you know how you're pretty good at controlling your thoughts around Edward?"He raised one thick black brow. "Yeah?"I just nodded, cutting my eyes to Renesmee. She was looking out the window, and I couldn't tell howinterested she was in our conversation, but I decided not to risk going any further.　　Jacob waited for me to add something else, and then his lower lip pushed out while he thought aboutwhat littleI'd said.　　As we drove in silence, I squinted through the annoying contacts into the cold rain; it wasn't quite coldenough for snow. My eyes were not as ghoulish as they had been in the beginning—definitely closer to adull reddish orange than to bright crimson. Soon they'd be amber enough for me to quit the contacts, ihoped the change wouldn't upset Charlie too much.　　Jacob was still chewing over our truncated conversation when we got to Charlie's. We didn't talk as wewalked at a quick human pace through the falling rain. My dad was waiting for us; he had the door openbefore I could knock.　　"Hey, guys! It seems like it's been years! Look at you, Nessie! Come to Grampa! I swear you've grownhalf a foot. And you look skinny, Ness." He glared at me. "Aren't they feeding you up there?""It's just the growth spurt," I muttered. "Hey, Sue," I called over his shoulder. The smell of chicken,tomato, garlic, and cheese issued from the kitchen; it probably smelled good to everyone else. I couldalso smell fresh pine and packing dust.　　Renesmee flashed her dimples. She never spoke in front of Charlie.　　"Well, come on in out of the cold, kids. Where's my son-in-law?""Entertaining friends," Jacob said, and then snorted. "You're so lucky you're out of the loop, Charlie.　　That's all I'm going to say."I punched Jacob lightly in the kidney while Charlie cringed.　　"Ow," Jacob complained under his breath; well, I'd thought I'd punched lightly.　　"Actually, Charlie, I have some errands to run."Jacob shot a glance at me but said nothing.　　"Behind on your Christmas shopping, Bells? You only have a few days, you know.""Yeah, Christmas shopping," I said lamely. That explained the packing dust. Charlie must have put theold decorations up.　　"Don't worry, Nessie," he whispered in her ear. "I got you covered if your mom drops the ball."I rolled my eyes at him, but in truth, I hadn't thought about the holidays at all.　　"Lunch's on the table," Sue called from the kitchen. "C'mon, guys.""See you later, Dad," I said, and exchanged a quick look with Jacob. Even if he couldn't help but thinkabout this near Edward, at least there wasn't much for him to share. He had no idea what I was up to.　　Of course, I thought to myself as I got into the car, it wasn't like I had much idea, either.　　The roads were slick and dark, but driving didn't intimidate me anymore. My reflexes were well up tothe job, and I barely paid attention to the road. The problem was keeping my speed from attractingattention when I had company. I wanted to be done with today's mission, to have the mystery sorted outso that I could get back to the vital task of learning. Learning to protect some, learning to kill others.　　I was getting better and better with my shield. Kate didn't feel the need to motivate me anymore—itwasn't hard to find reasons to feel angry, now that I knew that was the key—and so I mostly workedwith Zafrina. She waspleased with my extension; I was able to cover almost a ten-foot area for more than a minute, though itexhausted me. This morning she'd been trying to find out if I could push the shield away from my mindaltogether. I didn't see what the use of that would be, but Zafrina thought it would help strengthen me,like exercising muscles in the stomach and back rather than just the arms. Eventually, you could lift moreweight when all the muscles were stronger.　　I wasn't very good at it. I had only gotten one glimpse of the jungle river she was trying to show me.　　But there were different ways to prepare for what was coming, and with only two weeks left, I worriedthat I might be neglecting the most important. Today I would rectify that oversight.　　I'd memorized the appropriate maps, and I had no problem finding my way to the address that didn'texist online, the one for J. Jenks. My next step would be Jason Jenks at the other address, the one Alicehad not given me.　　To say that it wasn't a nice neighborhood would be an understatement. The most nondescript of all theCullens' cars was still outrageous on this street. My old Chevy would have looked healthy here. Duringmy human years, I would have locked the doors and driven away as fast as I dared. As it was, I was alittle fascinated. I tried to imagine Alice in this place for any reason, and failed.　　The buildings—all three stories, all narrow, all leaning slightly as if bowed by the pounding rain—weremostly old houses divided up into multiple apartments. It was hard to tell what color the peeling paint wassupposed to be. Everything had faded to shades of gray. A few of the buildings had businesses on thefirst floor: a dirty bar with the windows painted black, a psychic's supply store with neon hands and tarotcards glowing fitfully on the door, a tattoo parlor, and a daycare with duct tape holding the broken frontwindow together. There were no lamps on inside any of the rooms, though it was grim enough outsidethat the humans should have needed the light. I could hear the low mumbling of voices in the distance; itsounded like TV.　　There were a few people about, two shuffling through the rain in opposite directions and one sitting onthe shallow porch of a boarded-up cut-rate law office, reading a wet newspaper and whistling. Thesound was much too cheerful for the setting.　　I was so bemused by the carefree whistler, I didn't realize at first that the abandoned building was rightwhere the address I was looking for should exist. There were no numbers on the dilapidated place, butthe tattoo parlor beside it was just two numbers off.　　I pulled up to the curb and idled for a second. I was getting into that dump one way or another, but howto do so without the whistler noticing me? I could park the next street over and come through the back....　　There might be more witnesses on that side. Maybe the rooftops? Was it dark enough for that kind ofthing?　　"Hey, lady," the whistler called to me.　　I rolled the passenger window down as if I couldn't hear him.　　The man laid his paper aside, and his clothes surprised me, now that I could see them. Under his longragged duster, he was a little too well dressed. There was no breeze to give me the scent, but the sheenon his dark red shirt looked like silk. His crinkly black hair was tangled and wild, but his dark skin wassmooth and perfect, his teeth white and straight. A contradiction.　　"Maybe you shouldn't park that car there, lady," he said. "It might not be here when you get back.""Thanks for the warning," I said.　　I shut off the engine and got out. Perhaps my whistling friend could give me the answers I needed fasterthan breaking and entering. I opened my big gray umbrella—not that I cared, really, about protecting thelong cashmere sweater-dress I wore. It was what a human would do.　　The man squinted through the rain at my face, and then his eyes widened. He swallowed, and I heard hisheart accelerate as I approached.　　Tm looking for someone," I began.　　"I'm someone," he offered with a smile. "What can I do for you, beautiful?""Are you J. Jenks?" I asked.　　"Oh," he said, and his expression changed from anticipation to understanding. He got to his feet andexamined me with narrowed eyes. "Why're you looking for J?""That's my business." Besides, I didn't have a clue. "Are you J?""No."We faced each other for a long moment while his sharp eyes ran up and down the fitted pearl graysheath I wore. His gaze finally made it to my face. "You don't look like the usual customer.""I'm probably not the usual," I admitted. "But I do need to see him as soon as possible.""I'm not sure what to do," he admitted.　　"Why don't you tell me your name?"He grinned. "Max.""Nice to meet you, Max. Now, why don't you tell me what you do for the usual?"His grin became a frown. "Well, J's usual clients don't look a thing like you. Your kind doesn't botherwith the downtown office. You just go straight up to his fancy office in the skyscraper."I repeated the other address I had, making the list of numbers a question.　　"Yeah, that's the place," he said, suspicious again. "How come you didn't go there?""This was the address I was given—by a very dependable source.""If you were up to any good, you wouldn't be here."I pursed my lips. I'd never been much good at bluffing, but Alice hadn't left me a lot of alternatives.　　"Maybe I'm not up to any good."Max's face turned apologetic. "Look, lady—""Bella.""Right. Bella. See, I need this job. J pays me pretty good to mostly just hang out here all day. I want tohelp you, I do, but—and of course Tm speaking hypothetically, right? Or off the record, or whateverworks for you—but if I pass somebody through that could get him in trouble, I'm out of work. Do yousee my problem?"I thought for a minute, chewing on my lip. "You've never seen anyone like me here before? Well, sort oflike me.　　My sister is a lot shorter than me, and she has dark spiky black hair.""J knows your sister?""I think so."Max pondered this fora moment.I smiled at him, and his breathing stuttered."Tell you what I'll do.HIgive Ja call and describe you to him. Let him make the decision."What did J. Jenks know? Would my description mean something to him? That was a troubling thought.　　"My last name is Cullen," I told Max, wondering if that was too much information. I was starting to getirritated with Alice. Did I really have to be quite this blind? She could have given me one or two morewords....　　"Cullen, got it."I watched as he dialed, easily picking out the number. Well, I could call J. Jenks myself if this didn'twork.　　"HeyJ, it's Max. I know I'm never supposed tocall you at this number except in an emergency___"Is there an emergency?1 heard faintly from the other end.　　"Well, notexactly. It's this girl who wants to see you___"/ fail to see the emergency in that Why didn't you follow normal procedure?　　"I didn't follow normal procedure 'cause she don't look like any kind of normal—"Is she a badge?!　　"No—"You can't be sure about that. Does she look like one ofKubarev's— ?　　"No—let me talk, okay? She says you know her sister or something."Not likely. What does she look like?　　"She looks like . . ." His eyes ran from my face to my shoes appreciatively. "Well, she looks like afreaking supermodel, that's what she looks like." I smiled and he winked at me, then went on. "Rockingbody, pale as a sheet, dark brown hair almost to her waist, needs a good night's sleep—any of thissoundingfamiliar?"No, it doesn't I'm not happy that you let your weakness for pretty women interrupt —"Yeah,so I'ma sucker for the pretty ones, what's wrong with that? I'm sorry I bothered you, man. Justforget it.""Name," I whispered.　　"Oh right. Wait," Max said. "She says her name is Bella Cullen. That help?"There was a beat of dead silence, and then the voice on the other end was abruptly screaming, using alot of words you didn't often hear outside of truck stops. Max's whole expression changed; all the jokingvanished and his lips went pale.　　"Because you didn't ask!" Max yelled back, panicked.　　There was another pause while J collected himself.　　Beautiful and pale?J asked, a tiny bit calmer.　　"I said that, didn't I?"Beautiful and pale? What did this man know about vampires? Was he one of us himself? I wasn'tprepared forthat kind of confrontation. I gritted my teeth. What had Alice gotten me into?　　Max waited for a minute through another volley of shouted insults and instructions and then glanced atme with eyes that were almost frightened. "But you only meet downtown clients on Thursdays—okay,okay! On it.'7He slid his phone shut.　　"He wants to see me?" I asked brightly.　　Max glowered. "You could have told me you were a priority client;7"I didn't know I was.""I thought you might be a cop," he admitted. "I mean, you don't look like a cop. But you act kind ofweird, beautiful."I shrugged.　　"Drug cartel?" he guessed.　　"Who, me?" I asked.　　"Yeah. Or your boyfriend or whatever.""Nope, sorry. I'm not really a fan of drugs, and neither is my husband. Just say no and all that."Max cussed under his breath. "Married. Can't catch a break."I smiled.　　"Mafia?""Nope.""Diamondsmuggling?""Please! Is that the kind of people you usually deal with, Max? Maybe you need a new job."I had to admit, I was enjoying myself a little. I hadn't interacted with humans much besides Charlie andSue. It was entertaining to watch him flounder. I was also pleased at how easy it was not to kill him.　　"You've got to be involved in something big. And bad," he mused.　　"It's not really like that.""That's what they all say. But who else needs papers? Or can afford to pay J's prices for them, I shouldsay. None of my business, anyway," he said, and then muttered the word married again.　　He gave me an entirely new address with basic directions, and then watched me drive away withsuspicious, regretful eyes.　　At this point, I was ready for almost anything—some kind of James Bond villain's high-tech lair seemedappropriate. So I thought Max must have given me the wrong address as a test. Or maybe the lair wassubterranean, underneath this very commonplace strip mall nestled up against a wooded hill in a nicefamily neighborhood.　　I pulled into an open spot and looked up at a tastefully subtle sign that read JASON SCOTT,ATTORNEY AT LAW.　　The office inside was beige with celery green accents, inoffensive and unremarkable. There was no scentof vampire here, and that helped me relax. Nothing but unfamiliar human. A fish tank was set into thewall, and a blandlypretty blond receptionist sat behind the desk.　　"Hello," she greeted me. "How can I help you?""I'm here to see Mr. Scott.""Do you have an appointment?""Not exactly."She smirked a little. "It could be a while, then. Why don't you have a seat while I—"April!a man's demanding voice squawked from the phone on her desk. I'm expecting a Ms. Cullenshortly.　　I smiled and pointed to myself.　　Send her in immediately. Do you understand? I don't care what it's interrupting.　　I could hear something else in his voice besides impatience. Stress. Nerves.　　"She's just arrived," April said as soon as she could speak.　　What? Send her in! What are you waiting for?　　"Right away, Mr. Scott!" She got to her feet, fluttering her hands as she led the way down a shorthallway, offering me coffee or tea or anything else I might have wanted.　　"Here you are," she said as she ushered me through the door into a power office, complete with heavywooden desk and vanity wall.　　"Close the door behind you," a raspy tenor voice ordered.　　I examined the man behind the desk while April made a hasty retreat. He was short and balding,probably around fifty-five, with a paunch. He wore a red silk tie with a blue-and-white-striped shirt, andhis navy blazer hung over the back of his chair. He was also trembling, blanched to a sickly paste color,with sweat beading on his forehead; I imagined an ulcer churning away under the spare tire.　　J recovered himself and rose unsteadily from his chair. He reached his hand across the desk.　　"Ms. Cullen. What an absolute delight."I crossed to him and shook his hand quickly once. He cringed slightly at my cold skin but did not seemparticularly surprised by it.　　"Mr. Jenks. Or do you prefer Scott?"He winced again. "Whatever you wish, of course.""How about you call me Bella, and HI call you J?""Like old friends," he agreed, mopping a silk handkerchief across his forehead. He gestured for me tohave a seat and took his own. "I must ask, am I finally meeting Mr. Jasper's lovely wife?"I weighed that for a second. So this man knew Jasper, not Alice. Knew him, and seemed afraid of him,too. "His sister-in-law, actually."He pursed his lips, as if he were grasping for meanings just as desperately as I was.　　"I trust Mr. Jasper is in good health?" he asked carefully.　　"I'm sure he is in excellent health. He's on an extended vacation at the moment."This seemed to clear up some of J's confusion. He nodded to himself and templed his fingers. "Just so.　　You should have come to the main office. My assistants there would have put you straight through to me—no need to go through less hospitable channels."I just nodded. I wasn't sure why Alice had given me the ghetto address.　　"Ah, well, you're here now. What can I do for you?"Tapers," I said, trying to make my voice sound like I knew what I was talking about.　　"Certainly," J agreed at once. "Are we talking birth certificates, death certificates, drivers' licenses,passports, social security cards... ?"I took a deep breath and smiled. I owed Max big time.　　And then my smile faded. Alice had sent me here for a reason, and I was sure it was to protectRenesmee. Her last gift to me. The one thing she would know I needed.　　The only reason Renesmee would need a forger was if she was running. And the only reason Renesmeewould be running was if we had lost.　　If Edward and I were running with her, she wouldn't need these documents right away. I was sure IDswere something Edward knew how to get his hands on or make himself, and I was sure he knew ways toescape without them. We could run with her for thousands of miles. We could swim with her across anocean.　　If we were around to save her.　　And all the secrecy to keep this out of Edward's head. Because there was a good chance that everythinghe knew, Aro would know. If we lost, Aro would certainly get the information he craved before hedestroyed Edward.　　It was as I had suspected. We couldn't win. But we must have a good shot at killing Demetri before welost, giving Renesmee the chance to run.　　My still heart felt like a boulder in my chest—a crushing weight. All my hope faded like fog in thesunshine. My eyes pricked.　　Who would I put this on? Charlie? But he was so defenselessly human. And how would I get Renesmeeto him? He was not going to be anywhere close to that fight. So that left one person. There really hadnever been anyone else.　　I'd thought this through so quickly that J didn't notice my pause.　　"Two birth certificates, two passports, one driver's license," I said in a low, strained tone.　　If he noticed the change in my expression, he pretended otherwise.　　"The names?""Jacob... Wolfe. And... Vanessa Wolfe." Nessie seemed like an okay nickname for Vanessa. Jacobwould get a kick out of the Wolfe thing.　　His pen scratched swiftly across a legal pad. "Middle names?""Just put something generic in.""If you prefer. Ages?""Twenty-seven for the man, five for the girl." Jacob could pull it off. He was a beast. And at the rateRenesmee was growing, I'd better estimate high. He could be her stepfather....　　"I'll need pictures if you prefer finished documents," J said, interrupting my thoughts. "Mr. Jasper usuallyliked to finish them himself."Well, that explained why J didn't know what Alice looked like.　　"Hold on," I said.　　This was luck. I had several family pictures shoved in my wallet, and the perfect one—Jacob holdingRenesmee on the front porch steps—was only a month old. Alice had given it to me just a few daysbefore... Oh. Maybe there wasn't that much luck involved after all. Alice knew I had this picture. Maybeshe'd even had some dim flash that I would need it before she gave it to me.　　"Here you go."J examined the picture for a moment. "Your daughter is very like you."I tensed. "She's more like her father.""Who is not this man." He touched Jacob's face.　　My eyes narrowed, and new sweat beads popped out on J's shiny head.　　"No. That is a very close friend of the family.""Forgive me," he mumbled, and the pen began scratching again. "How soon will you need thedocuments?""Can I get them in a week?""That's a rush order. It will cost twice as—but forgive me. I forgot with whom I was speaking."Clearly, he knew Jasper.　　"Just give me a number."He seemed hesitant to say it aloud, though I was sure, having dealt with Jasper, he must have known thatprice wasn't really an object. Not even taking into consideration the bloated accounts that existed all overthe world with the Cullens' various names on them, there was enough cash stashed all over the house tokeep a small country afloat for a decade; it reminded me of the way there were always a hundredfishhooks in the back of any drawer at Charlie's house. I doubted anyone would even notice the smallstack I'd removed in preparation for today.　　J wrote the price down on the bottom of the legal pad.　　I nodded calmly. I had more than that with me. I unclasped my bag again and counted out the rightamount—I had it all paper-clipped into five-thousand-dollar increments, so it took no time at all.　　"There.""Ah, Bella, you don't really have to give me the entire sum now. It's customary for you to save half toensure delivery."I smiled wanly at the nervous man. "But I trust you, J. Besides, I'll give you a bonus—the same againwhen I get the documents.""That's not necessary, I assure you.""Don't worry about it." It wasn't like I could take it with me. "So HI meet you here next week at thesame time?"He gave me a pained look. "Actually, I prefer to make such transactions in places unrelated to myvarious businesses.""Of course. I'm sure I'm not doing this the way you expect.""I'm used to having no expectations when it comes to the Cullen family." He grimaced and then quicklycomposed his face again. "Shall we meet at eight o'clock a week from tonight at The Pacifico? It's onUnion Lake, and the food is exquisite.""Perfect." Not that I would be joining him for dinner. He actually wouldn't like it much if I did.　　I rose and shook his hand again. This time he didn't flinch. But he did seem to have some new worry onhis mind. His mouth was pinched up, his back tense.　　"Will you have trouble with that deadline?" I asked.　　"What?" He looked up, taken off guard by my question. "The deadline? Oh, no. No worries at all. I willcertainly have your documents done on time."It would have been nice to have Edward here, so that I would know what J's real worries were. Isighed. Keeping secrets from Edward was bad enough; having to be away from him was almost toomuch.　　"Then HI see you in one week."
    Chapter 34 Declared
    I heard the music before I was out of the car. Edward hadn't touched his piano since the night Alice left.　　Now, as I shut the car door, I heard the song morph through a bridge and change into my lullaby.　　Edward was welcoming me home.　　I moved slowly as I pulled Renesmee—fast asleep; we'd been gone all day—from the car. We'd leftJacob at Charlie's—he'd said he was going to catch a ride home with Sue. I wondered if he was trying tofill his head with enough trivia to crowd out the image of the way my face had looked when I'd walkedthrough Charlie's door.　　As I walked slowly to the Cullen house now, I recognized that the hope and uplift that seemed almost avisible aura around the big white house had been mine this morning, too. It felt alien to me now.　　I wanted to cry again, hearing Edward play for me. But I pulled it together. I didn't want him to besuspicious. I would leave no clues in his mind for Aro if I could help it.　　Edward turned his head and smiled when I came in the door, but kept playing.　　"Welcome home," he said, as if this was just any normal day. As if there weren't twelve other vampiresin the room involved in various pursuits, and a dozen more scattered around somewhere. "Did you have agood time with Charlie today?""Yes. Sorry I was gone so long. I stepped out to do a little Christmas shopping for Renesmee. I know itwon't be much of an event, but..." I shrugged.　　Edward's lips turned down. He quit playing and spun around on the bench so that his whole body wasfacing me. He put one hand on my waist and pulled me closer. "I hadn't thought much about it. If youwant to make an event of it—""No," I interrupted him. I flinched internally at the idea of trying to fake more enthusiasm than the bareminimum. "I just didn't want to let it pass without giving her something.""Do I get to see?""If you want. It's only a little thing."Renesmee was completely unconscious, snoring delicately against my neck. I envied her. It would havebeen nice to escape reality, even for just a few hours.　　Carefully, I fished the little velvet jewelry bag from my clutch without opening the purse enough forEdward to see the cash I was still carrying.　　"It caught my eye from the window of an antique store while I was driving by."I shook the little golden locket into his palm. It was round with a slender vine border carved around theoutside edge of the circle. Edward popped the tiny catch and looked inside. There was space for a smallpicture and, on the opposite side, an inscription in French.　　"Do you know what this says?" he asked in a different tone, more subdued than before.　　"The shopkeeper told me it said something along the lines of 'more than my own life.' Is that right?""Yes, he had it right."He looked up at me, his topaz eyes probing. I met his gaze for a moment, then pretended to bedistracted by the television.　　"I hope she likes it," I muttered.　　"Of course she will," he said lightly, casually, and I was sure in that second that he knew I was keepingsomething from him. I was also sure that he had no idea of the specifics.　　"Let's take her home," he suggested, standing and putting his arm around my shoulders.　　I hesitated.　　"What?" he demanded.　　"I wanted to practice with Emmett a little___" I'd lost the whole day to my vital errand; it made me feelbehind.　　Emmett—on the sofa with Rose and holding the remote, of course—looked up and grinned inanticipation. "Excellent. The forest needs thinning."Edward frowned at Emmett and then at me.　　"There's plenty of time for that tomorrow," he said.　　"Don't be ridiculous," I complained. "There's no such thing as plenty of time anymore. That conceptdoes not exist. I have a lot to learn and—"He cut me off. "Tomorrow."And his expression was such that not even Emmett argued.　　i was surprised at how hard it was to go back to a routine that was, after all, brand new. But strippingaway even that little bit of hope I'd been fostering made everything seem impossible.　　I tried to focus on the positives. There was a good chance that my daughter was going to survive whatwascoming, and Jacob, too. If they had a future, then that was a kind of victory, wasn't it? Our little bandmust be going to hold their own if Jacob and Renesmee were going to have the opportunity to run in thefirst place. Yes, Alice's strategy only made sense if we were going to put up a really good fight. So, akind of victory there, too, considering that the Volturi had never been seriously challenged in millennia.　　It was not going to be the end of the world. Just the end of the Cullens. The end of Edward, the end ofme.　　I preferred it that way—the last part anyway. I would not live without Edward again; if he was leavingthis world, then I would be right behind him.　　I wondered idly now and then if there would be anything for us on the other side. I knew Edward didn'treally believe so, but Carlisle did. I couldn't imagine it myself. On the other hand, I couldn't imagineEdward not existing somehow, somewhere. If we could be together in any place, then that was a happyending.　　And so the pattern of my days continued, just that much harder than before.　　We went to see Charlie on Christmas Day, Edward, Renesmee, Jacob, and I. All of Jacob's pack werethere, plus Sam, Emily, and Sue. It was a big help to have them there in Charlie's little rooms, their huge,warm bodies wedged into corners around his sparsely decorated tree—you could see exactly where he'dgotten bored and quit—and overflowing his furniture. You could always count on werewolves to bebuzzed about a coming fight, no matter how suicidal. The electricity of their excitement provided a nicecurrent that disguised my utter lack of spirit. Edward was, as always, a better actor than I was.　　Renesmee wore the locket I'd given her at dawn, and in her jacket pocket was the MP3 player Edwardhad given her—a tiny thing that held five thousand songs, already filled with Edward's favorites. On herwrist was an intricately braided Quileute version of a promise ring. Edward had gritted his teeth over thatone, but it didn't bother me.　　Soon, so soon, I would be giving her to Jacob for safekeeping. How could I be bothered by any symbolof the commitment I was so relying on?　　Edward had saved the day by ordering a gift for Charlie, too. It had shown up yesterday—priorityovernight shipping—and Charlie spent all morning reading the thick instruction manual to his new fishingsonar system.　　From the way the werewolves ate, Sue's lunch spread must have been good. I wondered how thegathering would have looked to an outsider. Did we play our parts well enough? Would a stranger havethought us a happy circle of friends, enjoying the holiday with casual cheer?　　I think Edward and Jacob both were as relieved as I was when it was time to go. It felt odd to spendenergy on the human fagade when there were so many more important things to be doing. I had a hardtime concentrating. At the same time, this was perhaps the last time I would see Charlie. Maybe it was agood thing that I was too numb to really register that.　　I hadn't seen my mother since the wedding, but I found I could only be glad for the gradual distancingthat had begun two years ago. She was too fragile for my world. I didn't want her to have any part ofthis. Charlie was stronger.　　Maybe even strong enough for a goodbye now, but I wasn't.　　It was very quiet in the car; outside, the rain was just a mist, hovering on the edge between liquid andice. Renesmee sat on my lap, playing with her locket, opening and closing it. I watched her and imaginedthe things I would say to Jacob right now if I didn't have to keep my words out of Edward's head.　　If its ever safe again, take her to Charlie. Tell him the whole story someday. Tell him how much I lovedhim, how I couldn't bear to leave him even when my human life was over. Tell him he was the best father.　　Tell him to pass my love on to Renee, all my hopes that she will be happy and well....　　I would have to give Jacob the documents before it was too late. I would give him a note for Charlie,too. And a letter for Renesmee. Something for her to read when I couldn't tell her I loved her anymore.　　There was nothing unusual about the outside of the Cullen house as we pulled into the meadow, but Icould hear some kind of subtle uproar inside. Many low voices murmured and growled. It soundedintense, and it sounded like an argument. I could pick out Carlisle's voice and Amun's more often than theothers.　　Edward parked in front of the house rather than going around to the garage. We exchanged one waryglance before we got out of the car.　　Jacob's stance changed; his face turned serious and careful. I guessed that he was in Alpha mode now.　　Obviously, something had happened, and he was going to get the information he and Sam would need.　　"Alistair is gone," Edward murmured as we darted up the steps.　　Inside the front room, the main confrontation was physically apparent. Lining the walls was a ring ofspectators, every vampire who had joined us, except for Alistair and the three involved in the quarrel.　　Esme, Kebi, and Tia were the closest to the three vampires in the center; in the middle of the room,Amun was hissing at Carlisle and Benjamin.　　Edward's jaw tightened and he moved quickly to Esme's side, towing me by the hand. I clutchedRenesmee tightly to my chest.　　"Amun, if you want to go, no one is forcing you to stay," Carlisle said calmly.　　"You're stealing half my coven, Carlisle!" Amun shrieked, stabbing one finger at Benjamin. "Is that whyyou called me here? To steal from me?"Carlisle sighed, and Benjamin rolled his eyes.　　"Yes, Carlisle picked a fight with the Volturi, endangered his whole family, just to lure me here to mydeath," Benjamin said sarcastically. "Be reasonable, Amun. I'm committed to do the right thing here—I'mnot joining any other coven. You can do whatever you want, of course, as Carlisle has pointed out.""This won't end well," Amun growled. "Alistair was the only sane one here. We should all be running.""Think of who you're calling sane," Tia murmured in a quiet aside.　　"We're all going to be slaughtered!""It's not going to come to a fight," Carlisle said in a firm voice.　　"You say!""If it does, you can always switch sides, Amun. I'm sure the Volturi will appreciate your help."Amun sneered at him. "Perhaps that is the answer."Carlisle's answer was soft and sincere. "I wouldn't hold that against you, Amun. We have been friendsfor a long time, but I would never ask you to die for me."Amun's voice was more controlled, too. "But you're taking my Benjamin down with you."Carlisle put his hand on Amun's shoulder; Amun shook it off.　　"I'll stay, Carlisle, but it might be to your detriment. I will join them if that's the road to survival. You'reall fools to think that you can defy the Volturi." He scowled, then sighed, glanced at Renesmee and me,and added in an exasperated tone, "I will witness that the child has grown. That's nothing but the truth.　　Anyone would see that.""That's all we've ever asked."Amun grimaced, "But not all that you are getting, it seems." He turned on Benjamin. "I gave you life.　　You're wasting it."Benjamin's face looked colder than I'd ever seen it; the expression contrasted oddly with his boyishfeatures. "It's a pity you couldn't replace my will with your own in the process; perhaps then you wouldhave been satisfied with me."Amun's eyes narrowed. He gestured abruptly to Kebi, and they stalked past us out the front door.　　"He's not leaving," Edward said quietly to me, "but he'll be keeping his distance even more from now on.　　He wasn't bluffing when he spoke of joining the Volturi.""Why did Alistair go?" I whispered.　　"No one can be positive; he didn't leave a note. From his mutters, it's been clear that he thinks a fight isinevitable. Despite his demeanor, he actually does care too much for Carlisle to stand with the Volturi. Isuppose he decided the danger was too much." Edward shrugged.　　Though our conversation was clearly just between the two of us, of course everyone could hear it.　　Eleazar answered Edward's comment like it had been meant for all.　　"From the sound of his mumblings, it was a bit more than that. We haven't spoken much of the Volturiagenda, but Alistair worried that no matter how decisively we can prove your innocence, the Volturi willnot listen. He thinks they will find an excuse to achieve their goals here."The vampires glanced uneasily at one another. The idea that the Volturi would manipulate their ownsacrosanct law for gain was not a popular idea. Only the Romanians were composed, their smallhalf-smiles ironic. They seemed amused at how the others wanted to think well of their ancient enemies.　　Many low discussions began at the same time, but it was the Romanians I listened to. Maybe becausethe fair-haired Vladimir kept shooting glances in my direction.　　"I do so hope Alistair was right about this," Stefan murmured to Vladimir. "No matter the outcome,word will spread. It's time our world saw the Volturi for what they've become. They'll never fall ifeveryone believes this nonsense about them protecting our way of life.""At least when we ruled, we were honest about what we were," Vladimir replied.　　Stefan nodded. "We never put on white hats and called ourselves saints."Tm thinking the time has come to fight," Vladimir said. "How can you imagine well ever find a betterforce to stand with? Another chance this good?""Nothing is impossible. Maybe someday—""We've been waiting for fifteen hundred years, Stefan. And they've only gotten stronger with theyears." Vladimir paused and looked at me again. He showed no surprise when he saw that I waswatching him, too. "If the Volturi win this conflict, they will leave with more power than they came with.　　With every conquest they add to their strengths. Think of what that newborn alone could give them"—hejerked his chin toward me—"and she is barely discovering her gifts. And the earth-mover." Vladimirnodded toward Benjamin, who stiffened. Almost everyone was eavesdropping on the Romanians now,like me. "With their witch twins they have no need of the illusionist or the fire touch." His eyes moved toZafrina, then Kate.　　Stefan looked at Edward. "Nor is the mind reader is exactly necessary. But I see your point. Indeed,they will gain much if they win.""More than we can afford to have them gain, wouldn't you agree?"Stefan sighed. "I think i must agree. And that means...""That we must stand against them while there is still hope.""If we can just cripple them, even, expose them ...""Then, someday, others will finish the job.""And our long vendetta will be repaid. At last."They locked eyes for a moment and then murmured in unison. "It seems the only way.""So we fight," Stefan said.　　Though I could see that they were torn, self-preservation warring with revenge, the smile they exchangedwas full of anticipation.　　"We fight," Vladimir agreed.　　I suppose it was a good thing; like Alistair, I was sure the battle was impossible to avoid. In that case,two more vampires fighting on our side could only help. But the Romanians' decision still made meshudder.　　"We will fight, too," Tia said, her usually grave voice more solemn than ever. "We believe the Volturi willoverstep their authority. We have no wish to belong to them." Her eyes lingered on her mate.　　Benjamin grinned and threw an impish glance toward the Romanians. "Apparently, I'm a hot commodity.　　It appears I have to win the right to be free.""This won't be the first time I've fought to keep myself from a king's rule," Garrett said in a teasing tone.　　He walked over and clapped Benjamin on the back. "Here's to freedom from oppression.""We stand with Carlisle," Tanya said. "And we fight with him."The Romanians' pronouncement seemed to have made the others feel the need to declare themselves aswell.　　"We have not decided/7Peter said. He looked down at his tiny companion; Charlotte's lips were set indissatisfaction. It looked like she'd made her decision. I wondered what it was.　　"The same goes for me," Randall said.　　"And me," Mary added.　　"The packs will fight with the Cullens," Jacob said suddenly. "We're not afraid of vampires," he addedwith a smirk.　　"Children," Peter muttered.　　"Infants," Randall corrected.　　Jacob grinned tauntingly.　　"Well, I'm in, too," Maggie said, shrugging out from under Siobhan's restraining hand. "I know truth is onCarlisle's side. I can't ignore that."Siobhan stared at the junior member of her coven with worried eyes. "Carlisle," she said as if they werealone, ignoring the suddenly formal feel of the gathering, the unexpected outburst of declarations, "I don'twant this to come to a fight.""Nor do I, Siobhan. You know that's the last thing I want." He half-smiled. "Perhaps you shouldconcentrate on keeping it peaceful.""You know that won't help," she said.　　I remembered Rose and Carlisle's discussion of the Irish leader; Carlisle believed that Siobhan had somesubtle but powerful gift to make things go her way—and yet Siobhan didn't believe it herself.　　"It couldn't hurt," Carlisle said.　　Siobhan rolled her eyes. "Shall I visualize the outcome I desire?" she asked sarcastically.　　Carlisle was openly grinning now. "If you don't mind.""Then there is no need for my coven to declare itself, is there?" she retorted. "Since there is no possibilityof a fight." She put her hand back on Maggie's shoulder, pulling the girl closer to her. Siobhan's mate,Liam, stood silent and expressionless.　　Almost everyone else in the room looked mystified by Carlisle and Siobhan's clearly joking exchange,but they didn't explain themselves.　　That was the end of the dramatic speeches for the night. The group slowly dispersed, some off to hunt,some to while away the time with Carlisle's books or televisions or computers.　　Edward, Renesmee, and I went to hunt. Jacob tagged along.　　"Stupid leeches," he muttered to himself when we got outside. "Think they're so superior." He snorted.　　"They'll be shocked when the infants save their superior lives, won't they?" Edward said.　　Jake smiled and punched his shoulder. "Hell yeah, they will."This wasn't our last hunting trip. We all would hunt again nearer to the time we expected the Volturi. Asthe deadline was not exact, we were planning to stay a few nights out in the big baseball clearing Alicehad seen, just incase. All we knew was that they would come the day that the snow stuck to the ground. We didn't wantthe Volturi too close to town, and Demetri would lead them to wherever we were. I wondered who hewould track in, and guessed that it would be Edward since he couldn't track me.　　I thought about Demetri while I hunted, paying little attention to my prey or the drifting snowflakes thathad finally appeared but were melting before they touched the rocky soil. Would Demetri realize that hecouldn't track me? What would he make of that? What would Aro? Or was Edward wrong? There werethose little exceptions to what I could withstand, those ways around my shield. Everything that wasoutside my mind was vulnerable—open to the things Jasper, Alice, and Benjamin could do. MaybeDemetri's talent worked a little differently, too.　　And then I had a thought that brought me up short. The half-drained elk dropped from my hands to thestony ground. Snowflakes vaporized a few inches from the warm body with tiny sizzling sounds. I staredblankly at my bloody hands.　　Edward saw my reaction and hurried to my side, leaving his own kill undrained.　　"What's wrong?" he asked in a low voice, his eyes sweeping the forest around us, looking for whateverhad triggered my behavior.　　"Renesmee," I choked.　　"She's just through those trees," he reassured me. "I can hear both her thoughts and Jacob's. She's fine.""That's not what I meant," I said. "I was thinking about my shield—you really think it's worth something,that it will help somehow. I know the others are hoping that I'll be able to shield Zafrina and Benjamin,even if I can only keep it up for a few seconds at a time. What if that's a mistake? What if your trust inme is the reason that we fail?"My voice was edging toward hysteria, though I had enough control to keep it low. I didn't want to upsetRenesmee.　　"Bella, what brought this on? Of course, it s wonderful that you can protect yourself, but you're notresponsible for saving anyone. Don't distress yourself needlessly.""But what if I can't protect anything?" I whispered in gasps. "This thing I do, it's faulty, it's erratic!　　There's no rhyme or reason to it. Maybe it will do nothing against Alec at all.""Shh," he hushed me. "Don't panic. And don't worry about Alec. What he does is no different than whatJane or Zafrina does. It's just an illusion—he can't get inside your head any more than I can.""But Renesmee does!" I hissed frantically through my teeth. "It seemed so natural, I never questioned itbefore. It's always been just part of who she is. But she puts her thoughts right into my head just like shedoes with everyone else. My shield has holes, Edward!"I stared at him desperately, waiting for him to acknowledge my terrible revelation. His lips were pursed,as if he was trying to decide how to phrase something. His expression was perfectly relaxed.　　"You thought of this a long time ago, didn't you?" I demanded, feeling like an idiot for my months ofoverlooking the obvious.　　He nodded, a faint smile pulling up one corner of his mouth. "The first time she touched you."I sighed at my own stupidity, but his calm had mellowed me some. "And this doesn't bother you? Youdon't see it as a problem?""I have two theories, one more likely than the other.""Give me the least likely first.""Well, she's your daughter," he pointed out. "Genetically half you. I used to tease you about how yourmind was on a different frequency than the rest of ours. Perhaps she runs on the same."This didn't work for me. "But you hear her mind just fine. Everyone hears her mind. And what if Alecruns on a different frequency? What if—?"He put a finger to my lips. "I've considered that. Which is why I think this next theory is much morelikely."I gritted my teeth and waited.　　"Do you remember what Carlisle said to me about her, right after she showed you that first memory?"Of course I remembered. "He said, It's an interesting twist. Like she's doing the exact opposite of whatyou can.'""Yes. And so I wondered. Maybe she took your talent and flipped it, too."I considered that.　　"You keep everyone out," he began.　　"And no one keeps her out?" I finished hesitantly.　　"That's my theory," he said. "And if she can get into your head, I doubt there's a shield on the planet whocould keep her at bay. That will help. From what we've seen, no one can doubt the truth of her thoughtsonce they've allowed her to show them. And I think no one can keep her from showing them, if she getsclose enough. If Aro allows her to explain___"I shuddered to think of Renesmee so close to Aro's greedy, milky eyes.　　"Well," he said, rubbing my tight shoulders. "At least there's nothing that can stop him from seeing thetruth.""But is the truth enough to stop him?" I murmured.　　For that, Edward had no answer.
    Chapter 35 Deadline
    "Headed out?" Edward asked, his tone nonchalant. There was a sort of forced composure about hisexpression. He hugged Renesmee just a little bit tighter to his chest.　　"Yes, a few last-minute things...," I responded just as casually.　　He smiled my favorite smile. "Hurry back to me.""Always."I took his Volvo again, wondering if he'd read the odometer after my last errand. How much had hepieced together? That I had a secret, absolutely. Would he have deduced the reason why I didn't confidein him? Did he guess that Aro might soon know everything he knew? I thought Edward could have cometo that conclusion, which explained why he had demanded no reasons from me. I guessed he was tryingnot to speculate too much, trying to keep my behavior off his mind. Had he put this together with my oddperformance the morning after Alice left, burning my book in the fire? I didn't know if he could havemade that leap.　　It was a dreary afternoon, already dark as dusk. I sped through the gloom, my eyes on the heavyclouds. Would it snow tonight? Enough to layer the ground and create the scene from Alice's vision?　　Edward estimated that we had about two more days. Then we would set ourselves in the clearing,drawing the Volturi to our chosen place.　　As I headed through the darkening forest, I considered my last trip to Seattle. I thought I knew Alice'spurpose in sending me to the dilapidated drop point where J. Jenks referred his shadier clients. If I'dgone to one of his other, more legitimate offices, would I have ever known what to ask for? if I'd met himas Jason Jenks or Jason Scott, legitimate lawyer, would I ever have unearthed J. Jenks, purveyor ofillegal documents? I'd had to go the route that made it clear I was up to no good. That was my clue.　　It was black when I pulled into the parking lot of the restaurant a few minutes early, ignoring the eagervalets by the entrance. I popped in my contacts and then went to wait for J inside the restaurant. ThoughI was in a hurry to bedone with this depressing necessity and back with my family, J seemed careful to keep himself untaintedby his baser associations; i had a feeling a handoff in the dark parking lot would offend his sensibilities.　　I gave the name Jenks at the podium, and the obsequious maftre d' led me upstairs to a small privateroom with a fire crackling in a stone hearth. He took the calf-length ivory trench coat I'd worn to disguisethe fact that I was wearing Alice's idea of appropriate attire, and gasped quietly at my oyster satincocktail dress. I couldn't help being a little flattered; I still wasn't used to being beautiful to everyonerather than just Edward. The mattre d' stuttered half-formed compliments as he backed unsteadily fromthe room.　　I stood by the fire to wait, holding my fingers close to the flame to warm them a little before theinevitable handshake. Not that J wasn't obviously aware that there was something up with the Cullens,but it was still a good habit to practice.　　For one half second, I wondered what it would feel like to put my hand in the fire. What it would feellike when I burned___J's entrance distracted my morbidity. The maftre d' took his coat, too, and it was evident that I was notthe only one who had dressed up for this meeting.　　"I'm so sorry I'm late," J said as soon as we were alone.　　"No, you're exactly on time."He held out his hand, and as we shook I could feel that his fingers were still quite noticeably warmer thanmine. It didn't seem to bother him.　　"You look stunning, if I may be so bold, Mrs. Cullen.""Thank you, J. Please, call me Bella.""I must say, it's a different experience working with you than it is with Mr. Jasper. Much less...　　unsettling." He smiled hesitantly.　　"Really? I've always found Jasper to have a very soothing presence."His eyebrows pulled together. "Is that so?" he murmured politely while clearly still in disagreement. Howodd. What had Jasper done to this man?　　"Have you known Jasper long?"He sighed, looking uncomfortable. "I've been working with Mr. Jasper for more than twenty years, andmy old partner knew him for fifteen years before that.... He never changes." J cringed delicately.　　"Yeah, Jasper's kind of funny that way."J shook his head as if he could shake away the disturbing thoughts. "Won't you have a seat, Bella?""Actually, I'm in a bit of a hurry. I've got a long drive home." As I spoke, I took the thick white envelopewith his bonus from my bag and handed it to him.　　"Oh," he said, a little catch of disappointment in his voice. He tucked the envelope into an inside pocketof his jacket without bothering to check the amount. "I was hoping we could speak for just a moment.""About?" I asked curiously.　　"Well, let me get you your items first. I want to make sure you're satisfied."He turned, placed his briefcase on the table, and popped the latches. He took out a legal-sized manilaenvelope.　　Though I had no idea what I should be looking for, I opened the envelope and gave the contents acursory glance. J had flipped Jacob's picture and changed the coloring so that it wasn't immediatelyevident that it was the same picture on both his passport and driver's license. Both looked perfectlysound to me, but that meant little. I glanced at the picture on Vanessa Wolfe's passport for a fraction of asecond, and then looked away quickly, a lump rising in my throat.　　"Thank you," I told him.　　His eyes narrowed slightly, and I felt he was disappointed that my examination was not more thorough.　　"I can assure you every piece is perfect. All will pass the most rigorous scrutiny by experts.""I'm sure they are. I truly appreciate what you've done for me, J.""It's been my pleasure, Bella. In the future, feel free to come to me for anything the Cullen family needs."He didn't even hint at it really, but this sounded like an invitation for me to take over Jasper's place asliaison.　　"There was something you wanted to discuss?""Er, yes. It's a bit delicate.. .." He gestured to the stone hearth with a questioning expression. I sat on theedge of the stone, and he sat beside me. Sweat was dewing up on his forehead again, and he pulled ablue silk handkerchief from his pocket and began mopping.　　"You are the sister of Mr. Jasper's wife? Or married to his brother?" he asked.　　"Married to his brother," I clarified, wondering where this was leading.　　"You would be Mr. Edward's bride, then?""Yes."He smiled apologetically. "I've seen all the names many times, you see. My belated congratulations. It'snice that Mr. Edward has found such a lovely partner after all this time.""Thank you very much."He paused, dabbing at the sweat. "Over the years, you might imagine that I've developed a very healthylevel of respect for Mr. Jasper and the entire family."I nodded cautiously.　　He took a deep breath and then exhaled without speaking.　　"J, please just say whatever you need to."He took another breath and then mumbled quickly, slurring the words together.　　"If you could just assure me that you are not planning to kidnap the little girl from her father, I wouldsleep better tonight.""Oh," I said, stunned. It took me a minute to understand the erroneous conclusion he'd drawn. "Oh no.　　It's nothing like that at all." I smiled weakly, trying to reassure him. "I'm simply preparing a safe place forher in casesomething were to happen to my husband and me."His eyes narrowed. "Are you expecting something to happen?" He blushed, then apologized. "Not thatit's any of my business."I watched the red flush spread behind the delicate membrane of his skin and was glad—as I oftenwas—that I was not the average newborn. J seemed a nice enough man, criminal behavior aside, and itwould have been a shame to kill him.　　"You never know." I sighed.　　He frowned. "May I wish you the best of luck, then. And please don't be put out with me, my dear,but... if Mr. Jasper should come to me and ask what names I put on these documents ...""Of course you should tell him immediately. I'd like nothing better than to have Mr. Jasper fully aware ofour entire transaction."My transparent sincerity seemed to ease a bit of his tension.　　"Very good," he said. "And I can't prevail upon you to stay for dinner?""I'm sorry, J. I'm short on time at present.""Then, again, my best wishes for your health and happiness. Anything at all the Cullen family needs,please don't hesitate to call on me, Bella.""Thank you, J."I left with my contraband, glancing back to see that J was staring after me, his expression a mixture ofanxiety and regret.　　The return trip took me less time. The night was black, and so I turned off my headlights and floored it.　　When I got back to the house, most of the cars, including Alice's Porsche and my Ferrari, were missing.　　The traditional vampires were going as far away as possible to satiate their thirst. I tried not to think oftheir hunting in the night, cringing at the mental picture of their victims.　　Only Kate and Garrett were in the front room, arguing playfully about the nutritional value of animalblood. I inferred that Garrett had attempted a hunting trip vegetarian-style and found it difficult.　　Edward must have taken Renesmee home to sleep. Jacob, no doubt, was in the woods close by thecottage. The rest of my family must have been hunting as well. Perhaps they were out with the otherDenalis.　　Which basically gave me the house to myself, and I was quick to take advantage.　　I could smell that I was the first one to enter Alice and Jasper's room in a long while, maybe the firstsince the night they'd left us. I rooted silently through their huge closet until I found the right sort of bag. Itmust have been Alice's; it was a small black leather backpack, the kind that was usually used as a purse,little enough that even Renesmee could carry it without looking out of place. Then I raided their pettycash, taking about twice the yearly income for the average American household. I guessed my theftwould be less noticeable here than anywhere else in the house, since this room made everyone sad. Theenvelope with the fake passports and IDs went into the bag on top of the money. Then I sat on the edgeof Alice and Jasper's bed and looked at the pitifully insignificantpackage that was all I could give my daughter and my best friend to help save their lives. I slumpedagainst the bedpost, feeling helpless.　　But what else could I do?　　I sat there for several minutes with my head bowed before the inkling of a good idea came to me.　　If...　　If I was to assume that Jacob and Renesmee were going to escape, then that included the assumptionthat Demetri would be dead. That gave any survivors a little breathing room, Alice and Jasper included.　　So why couldn't Alice and Jasper help Jacob and Renesmee? If they were reunited, Renesmee wouldhave the best protection imaginable. There was no reason why this couldn't happen, except for the factthat Jake and Renesmee both were blind spots for Alice. How would she begin to look for them?　　I deliberated for a moment, then left the room, crossing the hall to Carlisle and Esme's suite. As usual,Esme's desk was stacked with plans and blueprints, everything neatly laid out in tall piles. The desk had aslew of pigeonholes above the work surface; in one was a box of stationery. I took a fresh sheet of paperand a pen.　　Then I stared at the blank ivory page for a full five minutes, concentrating on my decision. Alice mightnot be able to see Jacob or Renesmee, but she could see me. I visualized her seeing this moment, hopingdesperately that she wasn't too busy to pay attention.　　Slowly, deliberately, I wrote the words RIO DE JANEIRO in all caps across the page.　　Rio seemed the best place to send them: It was far away from here, Alice and Jasper were already inSouth America at last report, and it wasn't like our old problems had ceased to exist just because we hadworse problems now. There was still the mystery of Renesmee's future, the terror of her racing age.　　We'd been headed south anyway. Now it would be Jacob's, and hopefully Alice's, job to search for thelegends.　　I bowed my head again against a sudden urge to sob, clenching my teeth together. It was better thatRenesmee go on without me. But I already missed her so much I could barely stand it.　　I took a deep breath and put the note at the bottom of the duffel bag, where Jacob would find it soonenough.　　I crossed my fingers that—since it was unlikely that his high school offered Portuguese—Jake had atleast taken Spanish as his language elective.　　There was nothing left now but waiting.　　For two days, Edward and Carlisle stayed in the clearing where Alice had seen the Volturi arrive. It wasthe same killing field where Victoria's newborns had attacked last summer. I wondered if it felt repetitiveto Carlisle, like deja vu. For me, it would be all new. This time Edward and I would stand with ourfamily.　　We could only imagine that the Volturi would be tracking either Edward or Carlisle. I wondered if itwould surprise them that their prey didn't run. Would that make them wary? I couldn't imagine the Volturiever feeling a need for caution.　　Though I was—hopefully—invisible to Demetri, I stayed with Edward. Of course. We only had a fewhours left to be together.　　Edward and I had not had a last grand scene of farewell, nor did I plan one. To speak the word was tomake it final. It would be the same as typing the words The End on the last page of a manuscript. So wedid not say our goodbyes, and we stayed very close to each other, always touching. Whatever end foundus, it would not find us separated.　　We set up a tent for Renesmee a few yards back into the protective forest, and then there was moredeja vu as we found ourselves camping in the cold again with Jacob. It was almost impossible to believehow much things had changed since last June. Seven months ago, our triangular relationship seemedimpossible, three different kinds of heartbreak that could not be avoided. Now everything was in perfectbalance. It seemed hideously ironic that the puzzle pieces would fit together just in time for all of them tobe destroyed.　　It started to snow again the night before New Year's Eve. This time, the tiny flakes did not dissolve intothe stony ground of the clearing. While Renesmee and Jacob slept—Jacob snoring so loudly I wonderedhow Renesmee didn't wake—the snow made first a thin icing over the earth, then built into thicker drifts.　　By the time the sun rose, the scene from Alice's vision was complete. Edward and I held hands as westared across the glittering white field, and neither of us spoke.　　Through the early morning, the others gathered, their eyes bearing mute evidence of their preparations—some light gold, some rich crimson. Soon after we all were together, we could hear the wolves movingin the woods. Jacob emerged from the tent, leaving Renesmee still sleeping, to join them.　　Edward and Carlisle were arraying the others into a loose formation, our witnesses to the sides likegalleries.　　I watched from a distance, waiting by the tent for Renesmee to wake. When she did, I helped her dressin the clothes I'd carefully picked out two days before. Clothes that looked frilly and feminine but thatwere actually sturdy enough to not show any wear—even if a person wore them while riding a giantwerewolf through a couple of states. Over her jacket I put on the black leather backpack with thedocuments, the money, the clue, and my love notes for her and Jacob, Charlie and Renee. She wasstrong enough that it was no burden to her.　　Her eyes were huge as she read the agony on my face. But she had guessed enough not to ask me whatI was doing.　　"I love you," I told her. "More than anything.""I love you, too, Momma," she answered. She touched the locket at her neck, which now held a tinyphoto of her, Edward, and me. "We'll always be together.""In our hearts we'll always be together," I corrected in a whisper as quiet as a breath. "But when the timecomes today, you have to leave me."Her eyes widened, and she touched her hand to my cheek. The silent no was louder than if she'dshouted it.　　I fought to swallow; my throat felt swollen. "Will you do it for me? Please?"She pressed her fingers harder to my face. Why?　　"I can't tell you," I whispered. "But you'll understand soon. I promise.'7In my head, I saw Jacob's face.　　I nodded, then pulled her fingers away. "Don't think of it," I breathed into her ear. "Don't tell Jacob until Itell you to run, okay?"This she understood. She nodded, too.　　I took from my pocket one last detail.　　While packing Renesmee's things, an unexpected sparkle of color had caught my eye. A chance ray ofsun through the skylight had hit the jewels on the ancient precious box stuffed high overhead on a shelf inan untouched corner. I considered it for a moment and then shrugged. After putting together Alice'sclues, I couldn't hope that the coming confrontation would be resolved peacefully. But why not try tostart things out as friendly as possible? I asked myself. What could it hurt? So I guess I must have hadsome hope left after all—blind, senseless hope—because I'd scaled the shelves and retrieved Aro'swedding present to me.　　Now I fastened the thick gold rope around my neck and felt the weight of the enormous diamond nestleinto the hollow of my throat.　　"Pretty," Renesmee whispered. Then she wrapped her arms like a vise around my neck. I squeezed heragainst my chest. Interlocked this way, I carried her out of the tent and to the clearing.　　Edward cocked one eyebrow as I approached, but otherwise did not remark on my accessory orRenesmee's. He just put his arms tight around us both for one long moment and then, with a deep sigh, letus go. I couldn't see a goodbye anywhere in his eyes. Maybe he had more hope for something after thislife than he'd let on.　　We took our place, Renesmee climbing agilely onto my back to leave my hands free. I stood a few feetbehind the front line made up by Carlisle, Edward, Emmett, Rosalie, Tanya, Kate, and Eleazar. Closebeside me were Benjamin and Zafrina; it was my job to protect them as long as I was able. They wereour best offensive weapons. If the Volturi were the ones who could not see, even for a few moments,that would change everything.　　Zafrina was rigid and fierce, with Senna almost a mirror image at her side. Benjamin sat on the ground,his palms pressed to the dirt, and muttered quietly about fault lines. Last night, he'd strewn piles ofboulders in natural-looking, now snow-covered heaps all along the back of the meadow. They weren'tenough to injure a vampire, but hopefully enough to distract one.　　The witnesses clustered to our left and right, some nearer than others—those who had declaredthemselves were the closest. I noticed Siobhan rubbing her temples, her eyes closed in concentration;was she humoring Carlisle? Trying to visualize a diplomatic resolution?　　In the woods behind us, the invisible wolves were still and ready; we could only hear their heavy panting,their beating hearts.　　The clouds rolled in, diffusing the light so that it could have been morning or afternoon. Edward's eyestightened as he scrutinized the view, and I was sure he was seeing this exact scene for the second time—the first time being Alice's vision. It would look just the same when the Volturi arrived. We only hadminutes or seconds left now.　　All our family and allies braced themselves.　　From the forest, the huge russet Alpha wolf came forward to stand at my side; it must have been toohard for him to keep his distance from Renesmee when she was in such immediate danger.　　Renesmee reached out to twine her fingers in thefur over his massive shoulder, and her body relaxed alittle bit. She was calmer with Jacob close.I felt a tiny bit better, too. As long Jacob was with Renesmee,she would be all right.　　Without risking a glance behind, Edward reached back to me. I stretched my arm forward so that Icould grip his hand. He squeezed my fingers.　　Another minute ticked by, and I found myself straining to hear some sound of approach.　　And then Edward stiffened and hissed low between his clenched teeth. His eyes focused on the forestdue north of where we stood.　　We stared where he did, and waited as the last seconds passed.
    Chapter 36 Bloodlust
    They came with pageantry, with a kind of beauty.　　They came in a rigid, formal formation. They moved together, but it was not a march; they flowed inperfect synchronicity from the trees—a dark, unbroken shape that seemed to hover a few inches abovethe white snow, so smooth was the advance.　　The outer perimeter was gray; the color darkened with each line of bodies until the heart of the formationwas deepest black. Every face was cowled, shadowed. The faint brushing sound of their feet was soregular it was like music, a complicated beat that never faltered.　　At some sign I did not see—or perhaps there was no sign, only millennia of practice—the configurationfolded outward. The motion was too stiff, too square to resemble the opening of a flower, though thecolor suggested that; it was the opening of a fan, graceful but very angular. The gray-cloaked figuresspread to the flanks while the darker forms surged precisely forward in the center, each movementclosely controlled.　　Their progress was slow but deliberate, with no hurry, no tension, no anxiety. It was the pace of theinvincible.　　This was almost my old nightmare. The only thing lacking was the gloating desire I'd seen on the faces inmy dream—the smiles of vindictive joy. Thus far, the Volturi were too disciplined to show any emotion atall. They also showed no surprise or dismay at the collection of vampires that waited for them here—acollection that looked suddenly disorganized and unprepared in comparison. They showed no surprise atthe giant wolf that stood in our midst.　　I couldn't help counting. There were thirty-two of them. Even if you did not count the two drifting,waifish black-cloaked figures in the very back, who I took to be the wives—their protected positionsuggesting that they would not be involved in the attack—we were still outnumbered. There were justnineteen of us who would fight, and then seven more to watch as we were destroyed. Even counting theten wolves, they had us.　　"The redcoats are coming, the redcoats are coming," Garrett muttered mysteriously to himself and thenchuckled once. He slid one step closer to Kate.　　"They did come," Vladimir whispered to Stefan.　　'The wives," Stefan hissed back. 'The entire guard. All of them together. It's well we didn't try Volterra."And then, as if their numbers were not enough, while the Volturi slowly and majestically advanced, morevampires began entering the clearing behind them.　　The faces in this seemingly endless influx of vampires were the antithesis to the Volturi's expressionlessdiscipline—they wore a kaleidoscope of emotions. At first there was the shock and even some anxiety asthey saw the unexpected force awaiting them. But that concern passed quickly; they were secure in theiroverwhelming numbers, secure in their position behind the unstoppable Volturi force. Their featuresreturned to the expression they'd worn before we'd surprised them.　　It was easy enough to understand their mindset—the faces were that explicit. This was an angry mob,whipped to a frenzy and slavering for justice. I did not fully realize the vampire world's feeling toward theimmortal children before I read these faces.　　It was clear that this motley, disorganized horde—more than forty vampires altogether—was theVolturi's own kind of witness. When we were dead, they would spread the word that the criminals hadbeen eradicated, that the Volturi had acted with nothing but impartiality. Most looked like they hoped formore than just an opportunity to witness—they wanted to help tear and burn.　　We didn't have a prayer. Even if we could somehow neutralize the Volturi's advantages, they could stillbury us in bodies. Even if we killed Demetri, Jacob would not be able to outrun this.　　I could feel it as the same comprehension sunk in around me. Despair weighted the air, pushing medown with more pressure than before.　　One vampire in the opposing force did not seem to belong to either party; I recognized Irina as shehesitated in between the two companies, her expression unique among the others. Irina's horrified gazewas locked on Tanya's position in the front line. Edward snarled, a very low but fervent sound.　　"Alistairwas right," he murmured to Carlisle.　　I watched Carlisle glance at Edward questioningly.　　"Alistair was right?" Tanya whispered.　　'They—Caius and Aro—come to destroy and acquire," Edward breathed almost silently back; only ourside could hear. "They have many layers of strategy already in place. If Irina's accusation had somehowproven to be false, they were committed to find another reason to take offense. But they can seeRenesmee now, so they are perfectly sanguine about their course. We could still attempt to defendagainst their other contrived charges, but first they have to stop, to hear the truth about Renesmee." Then,even lower. "Which they have no intention of doing."Jacob gave a strange little huff.　　And then, unexpectedly, two seconds later, the procession did halt. The low music of perfectlysynchronizedmovements turned to silence. The flawless discipline remained unbroken; the Volturi froze into absolutestillness as one. They stood about a hundred yards away from us.　　Behind me, to the sides, I heard the beating of large hearts, closer than before. I risked glances to the leftand the right from the corners of my eyes to see what had stopped the Volturi advance.　　The wolves had joined us.　　On either side of our uneven line, the wolves branched out in long, bordering arms. I only spared afraction of a second to note that there were more than ten wolves, to recognize the wolves I knew andthe ones I'd never seen before. There were sixteen of them spaced evenly around us—seventeen total,counting Jacob. It was clear from their heights and oversized paws that the newcomers all were very,very young. I supposed I should have foreseen this. With so many vampires encamped in theneighborhood, a werewolf population explosion was inevitable.　　More children dying. I wondered why Sam had allowed this, and then I realized he had no other choice.　　If any of the wolves stood with us, the Volturi would be sure to search out the rest. They had gambledtheir entire species on this stand.　　And we were going to lose.　　Abruptly, I was furious. Beyond furious, I was murderously enraged. My hopeless despair vanishedentirely. A faint reddish glow highlighted the dark figures in front of me, and all I wanted in that momentwas the chance to sink my teeth into them, to rip their limbs from their bodies and pile them for burning. Iwas so maddened I could have danced around the pyre where they roasted alive; I would have laughedwhile their ashes smoldered. My lips curved back automatically, and a low, fierce snarl tore up my throatfrom the pit of my stomach. I realized the corners of my mouth were turned up in a smile.　　Beside me, Zafrina and Senna echoed my hushed growl. Edward squeezed the hand he still held,cautioning me.　　The shadowed Volturi faces were still expressionless for the most part. Only two sets of eyes betrayedany emotion at all. In the very center, touching hands, Aro and Caius had paused to evaluate, and theentire guard had paused with them, waiting for the order to kill. The two did not look at each other, but itwas obvious that they were communicating. Marcus, though touching Aro's other hand, did not seem partof the conversation. His expression was not as mindless as the guards', but it was nearly as blank. Likethe one other time I'd seen him, he appeared to be utterly bored.　　The bodies of the VolturFs witnesses leaned toward us, their eyes fixed furiously on Renesmee and me,but they stayed near the fringe of the forest, leaving a wide berth between themselves and the Volturisoldiers. Only Irina hovered close behind the Volturi, just a few paces away from the ancient females—both fair-haired with powdery skin and filmed eyes—and their two massive bodyguards.　　There was a woman in one of the darker gray cloaks just behind Aro. I couldn't be sure, but it lookedlike she might actually be touching his back. Was this the other shield, Renata? I wondered, as Eleazarhad, if she would be able to repel me.　　But I would not waste my life trying to get to Caius or Aro. I had more vital targets.　　I searched the line for them now and had no difficulty picking out the two petite, deep gray cloaks nearthe heart of the arrangement. Alec and Jane, easily the smallest members of the guard, stood just toMarcus's side, flanked by Demetri on the other. Their lovely faces were smooth, giving nothing away;they wore the darkest cloaks beside the pure black of the ancients. The witch twins, Vladimir had calledthem. Their powers were the cornerstone of the Volturi offensive. The jewels in Aro's collection.　　My muscles flexed, and venom welled in my mouth.　　Aro's and Caius's clouded red eyes flickered across our line. I read disappointment in Aro's face as hisgaze roved over our faces again and again, looking for one that was missing. Chagrin tightened his lips.　　In that moment, I was nothing but grateful that Alice had run.　　As the pause lengthened, I heard Edward's breath speed.　　"Edward?" Carlisle asked, low and anxious.　　'They're not sure how to proceed. They're weighing options, choosing key targets—me, of course, you,Eleazar, Tanya. Marcus is reading the strength of our ties to each other, looking for weak points. TheRomanians' presence irritates them. They're worried about the faces they don't recognize—Zafrina andSenna in particular—and the wolves, naturally. They've never been outnumbered before. That's whatstopped them.""Outnumbered?" Tanya whispered incredulously.　　"They don't count their witnesses," Edward breathed. "They are nonentities, meaningless to the guard.　　Aro just enjoys an audience.""Should I speak?" Carlisle asked.　　Edward hesitated, then nodded. "This is the only chance you'll get."Carlisle squared his shoulders and paced several steps ahead of our defensive line. I hated to see himalone, unprotected.　　He spread his arms, holding his palms up as if in greeting. "Aro, my old friend. It's been centuries."The white clearing was dead silent for a long moment. I could feel the tension rolling off Edward as helistened to Aro's assessment of Carlisle's words. The strain mounted as the seconds ticked by.　　And then Aro stepped forward out of the center of the Volturi formation. The shield, Renata, movedwith him as if the tips of her fingers were sewn to his robe. For the first time, the Volturi ranks reacted. Amuttered grumble rolled through the line, eyebrows lowered into scowls, lips curled back from teeth. Afew of the guard leaned forward into a crouch.　　Aro held one hand up toward them. "Peace."He walked just a few paces more, then cocked his head to one side. His milky eyes glinted withcuriosity.　　"Fair words, Carlisle," he breathed in his thin, wispy voice. "They seem out of place, considering thearmy you've assembled to kill me, and to kill my dear ones."Carlisle shook his head and stretched his right hand forward as if there were not still almost a hundredyardsbetween them. "You have but to touch my hand to know that was never my intent."Aro's shrewd eyes narrowed. "But how can your intent possibly matter, dear Carlisle, in the face of whatyou have done?" He frowned, and a shadow of sadness crossed his features—whether it was genuine ornot, I could not tell.　　"I have not committed the crime you are here to punish me for.""Then step aside and let us punish those responsible. Truly, Carlisle, nothing would please me more thanto preserve your life today.""No one has broken the law, Aro. Let me explain." Again, Carlisle offered his hand.　　Before Aro could answer, Caius drifted swiftly forward to Aro's side.　　"So many pointless rules, so many unnecessary laws you create for yourself, Carlisle," the white-hairedancient hissed. "How is it possible that you defend the breaking of one that truly matters?""The law is not broken. If you would listen—""We see the child, Carlisle," Caius snarled. "Do not treat us as fools.""She is not an immortal. She is not a vampire. I can easily prove this with just a few moments—"Caius cut him off. "If she is not one of the forbidden, then why have you massed a battalion to protecther?""Witnesses, Caius, just as you have brought." Carlisle gestured to the angry horde at the edge of thewoods; some of them growled in response. "Any one of these friends can tell you the truth about thechild. Or you could just look at her, Caius. See the flush of human blood in her cheeks.""Artifice!" Caius snapped. "Where is the informer? Let her come forward!" He craned his neck arounduntil he spotted Irina lingering behind the wives. "You! Come!"Irina stared at him uncomprehendingly, her face like that of someone who has not entirely awakenedfrom a hideous nightmare. Impatiently, Caius snapped his fingers. One of the wives' huge bodyguardsmoved to Irina's side and prodded her roughly in the back. Irina blinked twice and then walked slowlytoward Caius in a daze. She stopped several yards short, her eyes still on her sisters.　　Caius closed the distance between them and slapped her across the face.　　It couldn't have hurt, but there was something terribly degrading about the action. It was like watchingsomeone kick a dog. Tanya and Kate hissed in synchronization.　　Irina's body went rigid and her eyes finally focused on Caius. He pointed one clawed finger atRenesmee, where she clung to my back, her fingers still tangled in Jacob's fur. Caius turned entirely red inmy furious view. A growl rumbled through Jacob's chest.　　"This is the child you saw?" Caius demanded. "The one that was obviously more than human?"Irina peered at us, examining Renesmee for the first time since entering the clearing. Her head tilted tothe side, confusion crossed her features.　　"Well?" Caius snarled.　　"I... I'm not sure," she said, her tone perplexed.　　Caius's hand twitched as if he wanted to slap her again. "What do you mean?" he said in a steelywhisper.　　"She's not the same, but I think it's the same child. What I mean is, she's changed. This child is biggerthan the one I saw, but—"Caius's furious gasp crackled through his suddenly bared teeth, and Irina broke off without finishing. Aroflitted to Caius's side and put a restraining hand on his shoulder.　　"Be composed, brother. We have time to sort this out. No need to be hasty."With a sullen expression, Caius turned his back on Irina.　　"Now, sweetling," Aro said in a warm, sugary murmur. "Show me what you're trying to say." He held hishand out to the bewildered vampire.　　Uncertainly, Irina took his hand. He held hers for only five seconds.　　"You see, Caius?" he said. "It's a simple matter to get what we need."Caius didn't answer him. From the corner of his eye, Aro glanced once at his audience, his mob, andthen turned back to Carlisle.　　"And so we have a mystery on our hands, it seems. It would appear the child has grown. Yet Irina's firstmemory was clearly that of an immortal child. Curious.""That's exactly what I'm trying to explain," Carlisle said, and from the change in his voice, I could guessat his relief. This was the pause we had pinned all our nebulous hopeson.　　I feltno relief. I waited, almost numb with rage, for the layers of strategy Edward had promised.　　Carlisle held out his hand again.　　Aro hesitated for a moment. "I would rather have the explanation from someone more central to thestory, my friend. Am I wrong to assume that this breach was not of your making?""Therewas no breach.""Be that as it may, I will have every facet of the truth." Aro's feathery voice hardened. "And the bestway to get that is to have the evidence directly from your talented son." He inclined his head in Edward'sdirection. "As the child clings to his newborn mate, I'm assuming Edward is involved."Of course he wanted Edward. Once he could see into Edward's mind, he would know all our thoughts.　　Except mine.　　Edward turned to quickly kiss my forehead and Renesmee's, not meeting my eyes. Then he strodeacross the snowy field, clapping Carlisle on the shoulder as he passed. I heard a low whimper frombehind me—Esme's terror breaking through.　　The red haze I saw around the Volturi army flamed brighter than before, i could not bear to watchEdward cross the empty white spacealone—but I alsocould not endure to have Renesmee one stepcloser to our adversaries. The opposing needs tore at me; I was frozen so tightly it felt like my bonesmight shatter from the pressure of it.　　I saw Jane smile as Edward crossed the midpoint in the distance between us, when he was closer tothem than he was to us.　　That smug little smile did it. My fury peaked, higher even than the raging bloodlust I'd felt the moment thewolves had committed to this doomed fight. I could taste madness on my tongue—I felt it flow throughme like a tidal wave of pure power. My muscles tightened, and I acted automatically. I threw my shieldwith all the force in my mind, flung it across the impossible expanse of the field—ten times my bestdistance—like a javelin. My breath rushed out in a huff with the exertion.　　The shield blew out from me in a bubble of sheer energy, a mushroom cloud of liquid steel. It pulsed likealivingthing—I could feel it, from the apex to the edges.　　There was no recoil to the elastic fabric now; in that instant of raw force, I saw that the backlash I'd feltbefore was of my own making—I had been clinging to that invisible part of me in self-defense,subconsciously unwilling to let it go. Now I set it free, and my shield exploded a good fifty yards out fromme effortlessly, taking only a fraction of my concentration. I could feel it flex like just another muscle,obedient to my will. I pushed it, shaped it to a long, pointed oval. Everything underneath the flexible ironshield was suddenly a part of me—I could feel the life force of everything it covered like points of brightheat, dazzling sparks of light surrounding me. I thrust the shield forward the length of the clearing, andexhaled in relief when I felt Edward's brilliant light within my protection. I held there, contracting this newmuscle so that it closely surrounded Edward, a thin but unbreakable sheet between his body and ourenemies.　　Barely a second had passed. Edward was still walking to Aro. Everything had changed absolutely, butno one had noticed the explosion except for me. A startled laugh burst through my lips. I felt the othersglancing at me and saw Jacob's big black eye roll down to stare at me like I'd lost my mind.　　Edward stopped a few steps away from Aro, and I realized with some chagrin that though I certainlycould, I should not prevent this exchange from happening. This was the point of all our preparations:　　getting Aro to hear our side of the story. It was almost physically painful to do it, but reluctantly I pulledmy shield back and left Edward exposed again. The laughing mood had vanished. I focused totally onEdward, ready to shield him instantly if something went wrong.　　Edward's chin came up arrogantly, and he held his hand out to Aro as if he were conferring a greathonor. Aro seemed only delighted with his attitude, but his delight was not universal. Renata flutterednervously in Aro:s shadow. Caius's scowl was so deep it looked like his papery, translucent skin wouldcrease permanently. Little Jane showed her teeth, and beside her Alec's eyes narrowed in concentration.　　I guessed that he was ready, like me, to act at a second's notice.　　Aro closed the distance without pause—and really, what did he have to fear? The hulking shadows ofthe lighter gray cloaks—the brawny fighters like Felix—were but a few yards away. Jane and her burninggift could throw Edward on the ground, writhing in agony. Alec could blind and deafen him before hecould take a step in Aro's direction. No one knew that I had the power to stop them, not even Edward.　　With an untroubled smile, Aro took Edward's hand. His eyes snapped shut at once, and then hisshoulders hunched under the onslaught of information.　　Every secret thought, every strategy, every insight—everything Edward had heard in the minds aroundhim during the last month—was now Aro's. And further back—every vision of Alice's, every quietmoment with our family, every picture in Renesmee's head, every kiss, every touch between Edward andme... All of that was Aro's now, too.　　I hissed with frustration, and the shield roiled with my irritation, shifting its shape and contracting aroundour side.　　"Easy, Bella," Zafrina whispered to me.　　I clenched my teeth together.　　Aro continued to concentrate on Edward's memories. Edward's head bowed, too, the muscles in hisneck locking tight as he read back again everything that Aro took from him, and Aro's response to it all.　　This two-way but unequal conversation continued long enough that even the guard grew uneasy. Lowmurmurs ran through the line until Caius barked a sharp order for silence. Jane was edging forward likeshe couldn't help herself, and Renata's face was rigid with distress. For a moment, I examined thispowerful shield that seemed so panicky and weak; though she was useful to Aro, I could tell she was nowarrior. It was not her job to fight but to protect. There was no bloodlust in her. Raw as I was, I knewthat if this were between her and me, I would obliterate her.　　I refocused as Aro straightened, his eyes flashing open, their expression awed and wary. He did notrelease Edward's hand.　　Edward's muscles loosened ever so slightly.　　"You see?" Edward asked, his velvet voice calm.　　"Yes, I see, indeed," Aro agreed, and amazingly, he sounded almost amused. "I doubt whether any twoamong gods or mortals have ever seen quite so clearly."The disciplined faces of the guard showed the same disbelief I felt.　　"You have given me much to ponder, young friend," Aro continued. "Much more than I expected." Stillhe did not release Edward's hand, and Edward's tense stance was that of one who listens.　　Edward didn't answer.　　"May I meet her?" Aro asked—almost pleaded—with sudden eager interest. "I never dreamed of theexistence of such a thing in all my centuries. What an addition to our histories!""What is this about, Aro?" Caius snapped before Edward could answer. Just the question had me pullingRenesmee around into my arms, cradling her protectively against my chest.　　"Something you've never dreamed of, my practical friend. Take a moment to ponder, for the justice weintended to deliver no longer applies."Caius hissed in surprise at his words.　　"Peace, brother," Aro cautioned soothingly.　　This should have been good news—these were the words we'd been hoping for, the reprieve we'dnever reallythought possible. Aro had listened to the truth. Aro had admitted that the law had not been broken.　　But my eyes were riveted on Edward, and I saw the muscles in his back tighten. I replayed in my headAro's instruction for Caius to ponder, and heard the double meaning.　　"Will you introduce me to your daughter?" Aro asked Edward again.　　Caius was not the only one who hissed at this new revelation.　　Edward nodded reluctantly. And yet, Renesmee had won over so many others. Aro always seemed theleader of the ancients. If he were on her side, could the others act against us?　　Aro still gripped Edward's hand, and he now answered a question that the rest of us had not heard.　　"I think a compromise on this one point is certainly acceptable, under the circumstance. We will meet inthe middle."Aro released his hand. Edward turned back toward us, and Aro joined him, throwing one arm casuallyover Edward's shoulder like they were the best of friends—all the while maintaining contact withEdward's skin. They began to cross the field back to our side.　　The entire guard fell into step behind them. Aro raised a hand negligently without looking at them.　　"Hold, my dear ones. Truly, they mean us no harm if we are peaceable."The guard reacted to this more openly than before, with snarls and hisses of protest, but held theirposition. Renata, clinging closer to Aro than ever, whimpered in anxiety.　　"Master," she whispered.　　"Don't fret, my love," he responded. "All is well.""Perhaps you should bring a few members of your guard with us," Edward suggested. "It will make themmore comfortable."Aro nodded as if this was a wise observation he should have thought of himself. He snapped his fingerstwice. "Felix, Demetri."The two vampires were at his side instantaneously, looking precisely the same as the last time I'd metthem. Both were tall and dark-haired, Demetri hard and lean as the blade of a sword, Felix hulking andmenacing as an iron-spiked cudgel.　　The five of them stopped in the middle of the snowy field.　　"Bella," Edward called. "Bring Renesmee... and a few friends."I took a deep breath. My body was tight with opposition. The idea of taking Renesmee into the centerof the conflict... But I trusted Edward. He would know if Aro was planning any treachery at this point.　　Aro had three protectors on his side of the summit, so I would bring two with me. It took me only asecond to decide.　　"Jacob? Emmett?" I asked quietly. Emmett, because he would be dying to go. Jacob, because hewouldn't be able to bear being left behind.　　Both nodded. Emmett grinned.　　I crossed the field with them flanking me. I heard another rumble from the guard as they saw my choices—clearly, they did not trust the werewolf. Aro lifted his hand, waving away their protest again.　　"Interesting company you keep," Demetri murmured to Edward.　　Edward didn't respond, but a low growl slipped through Jacob's teeth.　　We stopped a few yards from Aro. Edward ducked under Aro's arm and quickly joined us, taking myhand.　　For a moment we faced each other in silence. Then Felix greeted me in a low aside.　　"Hello again, Bella." He grinned cockily while still tracking Jacob's every twitch with his peripheral vision.　　I smiled wryly at the mountainous vampire. "Hey, Felix."Felix chuckled. "You look good. Immortality suits you.""Thanks so much.""You're welcome. It's too bad ..."He let his comment trail off into silence, but I didn't need Edward's gift to imagine the end. It's too badwere going to kill you in a sec.　　"Yes, too bad, isn't it?" I murmured.　　Felix winked.　　Aro paid no attention to our exchange. He leaned his head to one side, fascinated. "I hear her strangeheart," he murmured with an almost musical lilt to his words. "I smell her strange scent." Then his hazyeyes shifted to me. "In truth, young Bella, immortality does become you most extraordinarily," he said. "Itis as if you were designed for this life."I nodded once in acknowledgment of his flattery.　　"You liked my gift?" he asked, eyeing the pendant I wore.　　"It's beautiful, and very, very generous of you. Thank you. I probably should have sent a note."Aro laughed delightedly. "It's just a little something I had lying around. I thought it might complementyour new face, and so it does."I heard a little hiss from the center of the Volturi line. I glanced over Aro's shoulder.　　Hmm. It seemed Jane wasn't happy about the fact that Aro had given me a present.　　Aro cleared his throat to reclaim my attention. "May I greet your daughter, lovely Bella?" he askedsweetly.　　This was what we'd hoped for, I reminded myself. Fighting the urge to take Renesmee and run for it, Iwalked two slow steps forward. My shield rippled out behind me like a cape, protecting the rest of myfamily while Renesmee was left exposed. It felt wrong, horrible.　　Aro met us, his face beaming.　　"But she's exquisite," he murmured. "So like you and Edward." And then louder, "Hello, Renesmee."Renesmee looked at me quickly. I nodded.　　"Hello, Aro," she answered formally in her high, ringing voice.　　Aro's eyes were bemused.　　"What is it?" Caius hissed from behind. He seemed infuriated by the need to ask.　　"Half mortal, half immortal," Aro announced to him and the rest of the guard without turning hisenthralled gaze from Renesmee. "Conceived so, and carried by this newborn while she was still human.""Impossible," Caius scoffed.　　"Do you think they've fooled me, then, brother?" Aro's expression was greatly amused, but Caiusflinched. "Is the heartbeat you hear a trickery as well?"Caius scowled, looking as chagrined as if Aro's gentle questions had been blows.　　"Calmly and carefully, brother," Aro cautioned, still smiling at Renesmee. "I know well how you loveyour justice, but there is no justice in acting against this unique little one for her parentage. And so muchto learn, so much to learn! I know you don't have my enthusiasm for collecting histories, but be tolerantwith me, brother, as I add a chapter that stuns me with its improbability. We came expecting only justiceand the sadness of false friends, but look what we have gained instead! A new, bright knowledge ofourselves, our possibilities."He held out his hand to Renesmee in invitation. But this was not what she wanted. She leaned away fromme, stretching upward, to touch her fingertips to Aro's face.　　Aro did not react with shock as almost everyone else had reacted to this performance from Renesmee;he was as used to the flow of thought and memory from other minds as Edward was.　　His smile widened, and he sighed in satisfaction. "Brilliant," he whispered.　　Renesmee relaxed back into my arms, her little face very serious.　　"Please?" she asked him.　　His smile turned gentle. "Of course I have no desire to harm your loved ones, precious Renesmee."Aro's voice was so comforting and affectionate, it took me in for a second. And then I heard Edward'steeth grind together and, far behind us, Maggie's outraged hiss at the lie.　　"I wonder," Aro said thoughtfully, seeming unaware of the reaction to his previous words. His eyesmoved unexpectedly to Jacob, and instead of the disgust the other Volturi viewed the giant wolf with,Aro's eyes were filled with a longing that I did not comprehend.　　"It doesn't work that way," Edward said, the careful neutrality gone from his suddenly harsh tone.　　"Just an errant thought," Aro said, appraising Jacob openly, and then his eyes moved slowly across thetwo lines of werewolves behind us. Whatever Renesmee had shown him, it made the wolves suddenlyinteresting to him.　　"They don't belong to us, Aro. They don't follow our commands that way. They're here because theywant to be."Jacob growled menacingly.　　"They seem quite attached to you, though," Aro said. "And your young mate and your... family. Loyal"His voice caressed the word softly.　　"They're committed to protecting human life, Aro. That makes them able to coexist with us, but hardlywith you. Unless you're rethinking your lifestyle."Aro laughed merrily. "Just an errant thought," he repeated. "You well know how that is. We none of uscanentirely control our subconscious desires."Edward grimaced. "I do know how that is. And I also know the difference between that kind of thoughtand the kind with a purpose behind it. It could never work, Aro."Jacob's vast head turned in Edward's direction, and a faint whine slipped from between his teeth.　　"He's intrigued with the idea of... guard dogs," Edward murmured back.　　There was one second of dead silence, and then the sound of the furious snarls ripping from the entirepack filled the giant clearing.　　There was a sharp bark of command—from Sam, I guessed, though I didn't turn to look—and thecomplaint broke off into ominous quiet.　　"I suppose that answers that question," Aro said, laughing again. "This lot has picked its side."Edward hissed and leaned forward. I clutched at his arm, wondering what could be in Aro's thoughtsthat would make him react so violently, while Felix and Demetri slipped into crouches in synchronization.　　Aro waved them off again. They all returned to their former posture, Edward included.　　"So much to discuss," Aro said, his tone suddenly that of an inundated businessman. "So much todecide. If you and your furry protector will excuse me, my dear Cullens, I must confer with my brothers."
    Chapter 37 Contrivances
    Aro did not rejoin his anxious guard waiting on the north side of the clearing; instead, he waved themforward.　　Edward started backing up immediately, pulling my arm and Emmett's. We hurried backward, keepingour eyes on the advancing threat. Jacob retreated slowest, the fur on his shoulders standing straight up ashe bared his fangs at Aro. Renesmee grabbed the end of his tail as we retreated; she held it like a leash,forcing him to stay with us. We reached our family at the same time that the dark cloaks surrounded Aroagain.　　Now there were only fifty yards between them and us—a distance any of us could leap in just a fractionof a second.　　Caius began arguing with Aro at once.　　"How can you abide this infamy? Why do we stand here impotently in the face of such an outrageouscrime, covered by such a ridiculous deception?" He held his arms rigidly at his sides, his hands curled intoclaws. I wondered why he did not just touch Aro to share his opinion. Were we seeing a division in theirranks already? Could we be that lucky?　　"Because it's all true," Aro told him calmly. "Every word of it. See how many witnesses stand ready togive evidence that they have seen this miraculous child grow and mature in just the short time they'veknown her. That they have felt the warmth of the blood that pulses in her veins." Aro's gesture sweptfrom Amun on one side across to Siobhan on the other.　　Caius reacted oddly to Aro's soothing words, starting ever so slightly at the mention of witnesses. Theanger drained from his features, replaced by a cold calculation. He glanced at the Volturi witnesses withan expression that looked vaguely... nervous.　　I glanced at the angry mob, too, and saw immediately that the description no longer applied. The frenzyfor action had turned to confusion. Whispered conversations seethed through the crowd as they tried tomake sense ofwhat had happened.　　Caius was frowning, deep in thought. His speculative expression stoked the flames of my smolderinganger at the same time that it worried me. What if the guard acted again on some invisible signal, as theyhad in their march? Anxiously, I inspected my shield; it felt just as impenetrable as before. I flexed it nowinto a low, wide dome that arced over our company.　　I could feel the sharp plumes of light where my family and friends stood—each one an individual flavorthat I thought I would be able to recognize with practice. I already knew Edward's—his was the verybrightest of them all. The extra empty space around the shining spots bothered me; there was no physicalbarrier to the shield, and if any of the talented Volturi got under it, it would protect no one but me. I feltmy forehead crease as I pulled the elastic armor very carefully closer. Carlisle was the farthest forward; Isucked the shield back inch by inch, trying to wrap it as exactly to his body as I could.　　My shield seemed to want to cooperate. It hugged his shape; when Carlisle shifted to the side to standnearer to Tanya, the elastic stretched with him, drawn to his spark.　　Fascinated, I tugged in more threads of the fabric, pulling it around each glimmering shape that was afriend or ally. The shield clung to them willingly, moving as they moved.　　Only a second had passed; Caius was still deliberating.　　"The werewolves," he murmured at last.　　With sudden panic, 1 realized that most of the werewolves were unprotected. I was about to reach outto them when I realize that, strangely, I could still feel their sparks. Curious, I drew the shield tighter in,until Amun and Kebi—the farthest edge of our group—were outside with the wolves. Once they were onthe other side, their lights vanished. They no longer existed to that new sense. But the wolves were stillbright flames—or rather, half of them were. Hmm... I edged outward again, and as soon as Sam wasunder cover, all the wolves were brilliant sparks again.　　Their minds must have been more interconnected than I'd imagined. If the Alpha was inside my shield,the rest of their minds were every bit as protected as his.　　"Ah, brother...," Aro answered Caius's statement with a pained look.　　"Will you defend that alliance, too, Aro?" Caius demanded. "The Children of the Moon have been ourbitter enemies from the dawn of time. We have hunted them to near extinction in Europe and Asia. YetCarlisle encourages a familiar relationship with this enormous infestation—no doubt in an attempt tooverthrow us. The better to protect his warped lifestyle."Edward cleared his throat loudly and Caius glared at him. Aro placed one thin, delicate hand over hisown face as if he was embarrassed for the other ancient.　　"Caius, it's the middle of the day," Edward pointed out. He gestured to Jacob. "These are not Childrenof the Moon, clearly. They bear no relation to your enemies on the other side of the world.""You breed mutants here," Caius spit back at him.　　Edward's jaw clenched and unclenched, then he answered evenly, "They aren't even werewolves. Arocan tell you all about it if you don't believe me."Not werewolves? I shot a mystified look at Jacob. He lifted his huge shoulders and let them drop—ashrug. He didn't know what Edward was talking about, either.　　"Dear Caius, I would have warned you not to press this point if you had told me your thoughts," Aromurmured. "Though the creatures think of themselves as werewolves, they are not. The more accuratename for them would be shape-shifters. The choice of a wolf form was purely chance. It could have beena bear or a hawk or a panther when the first change was made. These creatures truly have nothing to dowith the Children of the Moon. They have merely inherited this skill from their fathers. It's genetic—theydo not continue their species by infecting others the way true werewolves do."Caius glared at Aro with irritation and something more—an accusation of betrayal, maybe.　　"They know our secret," he said flatly.　　Edward looked about to answer this accusation, but Aro spoke faster. "They are creatures of oursupernatural world, brother. Perhaps even more dependent upon secrecy than we are; they can hardlyexpose us. Carefully, Caius. Specious allegations get us nowhere."Caius took a deep breath and nodded. They exchanged a long, significant glance.　　I thought I understood the instruction behind Aro's careful wording. False charges weren't helpingconvince the watching witnesses on either side; Aro was cautioning Caius to move on to the nextstrategy. I wondered if the reason behind the apparent strain between the two ancients—Caius'sunwillingness to share his thoughts with a touch—was that Caius didn't care about the show as much asAro did. If the coming slaughter was so much more essential to Caius than an untarnished reputation.　　"I want to talk to the informant," Caius announced abruptly, and turned his glare on Irina.　　Irina wasn't paying attention to Caius and Aro's conversation; her face was twisted in agony, her eyeslocked on her sisters, lined up to die. It was clear on her face that she knew now her accusation hadbeen totally false.　　"Irina," Caius barked, unhappy to have to address her.　　She looked up, startled and instantly afraid.　　Caius snapped his fingers.　　Hesitantly, she moved from the fringes of the Volturi formation to stand in front of Caius again.　　"So you appear to have been quite mistaken in your allegations," Caius began.　　Tanya and Kate leaned forward anxiously.　　"I'm sorry," Irina whispered. "I should have made sure of what I was seeing. But I had no idea___" Shegesturedhelplessly in our direction.　　"Dear Caius, could you expect her to have guessed in an instant something so strange and impossible?"Aro asked. "Any of us would have made the same assumption."Caius flicked his fingers at Aro to silence him.　　"We all know you made a mistake," he said brusquely. "I meant to speak of your motivations."Irina waited nervously for him to continue, and then repeated, "My motivations?""Yes, for coming to spy on them in the first place."Irina flinched at the word spy.　　"You were unhappy with the Cullens, were you not?"She turned her miserable eyes to Carlisle's face. "I was," she admitted.　　"Because... ?" Caius prompted.　　"Because the werewolves killed my friend," she whispered. "And the Cullens wouldn't stand aside to letme avenge him.""The shape-shifters," Aro corrected quietly.　　"So the Cullens sided with the shape-shifters against our own kind—against the friend of a friend,even," Caius summarized.　　I heard Edward make a disgusted sound under his breath. Caius was ticking down his list, looking for anaccusation that would stick.　　Irina's shoulders stiffened. "That's how I saw it."Caius waited again and then prompted, "If you'd like to make a formal complaint against theshape-shifters—and the Cullens for supporting their actions—now would be the time." He smiled a tinycruel smile, waiting for Irina to give him his next excuse.　　Maybe Caius didn't understand real families—relationships based on love rather than just the love ofpower. Maybe he overestimated the potency of vengeance.　　Irina's jaw jerked up, her shoulders squared.　　"No, I have no complaint against the wolves, or the Cullens. You came here today to destroy animmortal child. No immortal child exists. This was my mistake, and I take full responsibility for it. But theCullens are innocent, and you have no reason to still be here. I'm so sorry," she said to us, and then sheturned her face toward the Volturi witnesses. "There was no crime. There's no valid reason for you tocontinue here."Caius raised his hand as she spoke, and in it was a strange metal object, carved and ornate.　　This was a signal. The response was so fast that we all stared in stunned disbelief while it happened.　　Before there was time to react, it was over.　　Three of the Volturi soldiers leaped forward, and Irina was completely obscured by their gray cloaks. Inthe same instant, a horrible metallic screeching ripped through the clearing. Caius slithered into the centerof the gray melee, and the shocking squealing sound exploded into a startling upward shower of sparksand tongues of flame. The soldiers leaped back from the sudden inferno, immediately retaking theirplaces in the guard's perfectly straight line.　　Caius stood alone beside the blazing remains of Irina, the metal object in his hand still throwing a thickjet of flame into the pyre.　　With a small clicking sound, the fire shooting from Caius's hand disappeared. A gasp rippled through themass of witnesses behind the Volturi.　　We were too aghast to make any noise at all. It was one thing to know that death was coming withfierce, unstoppable speed; it was another thing to watch it happen.　　Caius smiled coldly. "Now she has taken full responsibility for her actions."His eyes flashed to our front line, touching swiftly on Tanya's and Kate's frozen forms.　　In that second I understood that Caius had never underestimated the ties of a true family. This was theploy. He had not wanted Irina's complaint; he had wanted her defiance. His excuse to destroy her, toignite the violence that filled the air like a thick, combustible mist. He had thrown a match.　　The strained peace of this summit already teetered more precariously than an elephant on a tightrope.　　Once the fight began, there would be no way to stop it. It would only escalate until one side was entirelyextinct. Our side. Caius knew this.　　So did Edward.　　"Stop them!" Edward cried out, jumping to grab Tanya's arm as she lurched forward toward the smilingCaius with a maddened cry of pure rage. She couldn't shake Edward off before Carlisle had his armslocked around her waist.　　"It's too late to help her," he reasoned urgently as she struggled. "Don't give him what he wants!"Kate was harder to contain. Shrieking wordlessly like Tanya, she broke into the first stride of the attackthat would end with everyone's death. Rosalie was closest to her, but before Rose could clinch her in aheadlock, Kate shocked her so violently that Rose crumpled to the ground. Emmett caught Kate's armand threw her down, then staggered back, his knees giving out. Kate rolled to her feet, and it looked likeno one could stop her.　　Garrett flung himself at her, knocking her to the ground again. He bound his arms around hers, lockinghis hands around his own wrists. I saw his body spasm as she shocked him. His eyes rolled back in hishead, but his hold did not break.　　"Zafrina," Edward shouted.　　Kate's eyes went blank and her screams turned to moans. Tanya stopped struggling.　　"Give me my sight back," Tanya hissed.　　Desperately, but with all the delicacy I could manage, I pulled my shield even tighter against the sparksof my friends, peeling it back carefully from Kate while trying to keep it around Garrett, making it a thinskin between them.　　And then Garrett was in command of himself again, holding Kate to the snow.　　"If I let you up, will you knock me down again, Katie?" he whispered.　　She snarled in response, still thrashing blindly.　　"Listen to me, Tanya, Kate," Carlisle said in a low but intense whisper. "Vengeance doesn't help hernow. Irina wouldn't want you to waste your lives this way. Think about what you're doing. If you attackthem, we all die."Tanya's shoulders hunched with grief, and she leaned into Carlisle for support. Kate was finally still.　　Carlisle andGarrett continued to console the sisters with words too urgent to sound like comfort.　　And my attention returned to the weight of the stares that pressed down on our moment of chaos. Fromthe corners of my eyes, I could see that Edward and everyone else besides Carlisle and Garrett were ontheir guard again as well.　　The heaviest glare came from Caius, staring with enraged disbelief at Kate and Garrett in the snow. Arowas watching the same two, incredulity the strongest emotion on his face. He knew what Kate could do.　　He had felt her potency through Edward's memories.　　Did he understand what was happening now—did he see that my shield had grown in strength andsubtlety far beyond what Edward knew me to be capable of? Or did he think Garrett had learned hisown form of immunity?　　The Volturi guard no longer stood at disciplined attention—they were crouched forward, waiting tospring the counterstrike the moment we attacked.　　Behind them, forty-three witnesses watched with very different expressions than the ones they'd wornentering the clearing. Confusion had turned to suspicion. The lightning-fast destruction of Irina had shakenthem all. What had been her crime?　　Without the immediate attack that Caius had counted on to distract from his rash act, the Volturiwitnesses were left questioning exactly what was going on here. Aro glanced back swiftly while Iwatched, his face betraying him with one flash of vexation. His need for an audience had backfired badly.　　I heard Stefan and Vladimir murmur to each other in quiet glee at Aro's discomfort.　　Aro was obviously concerned with keeping his white hat, as the Romanians had put it. But I didn'tbelieve that the Volturi would leave us in peace just to save their reputation. After they finished with us,surely they would slaughter their witnesses for that purpose. I felt a strange, sudden pity for the mass ofthe strangers the Volturi had brought to watch us die. Demetri would hunt them until they were extinct,too.　　For Jacob and Renesmee, for Alice and Jasper, for Alistair, and for these strangers who had not knownwhat today would cost them, Demetri had to die.　　Aro touched Caius's shoulder lightly. "Irina has been punished for bearing false witness against thischild." So that was to be their excuse. He went on. "Perhaps we should return to the matter at hand?"Caius straightened, and his expression hardened into unreadability. He stared forward, seeing nothing.　　His face reminded me, oddly, of a person who'd just learned he'd been demoted.　　Aro drifted forward, Renata, Felix, and Demetri automatically moving with him.　　"Just to be thorough," he said, "I'd like to speak with a few of your witnesses. Procedure, you know."He waved a hand dismissively.　　Two things happened at once. Caius's eyes focused on Aro, and the tiny cruel smile came back. AndEdward hissed, his hands balling up in fists so tight it looked like the bones in his knuckles would splitthrough his diamond-hard skin.　　I was desperate to ask him what was going on, but Aro was close enough to hear even the quietestbreath. Isaw Carlisle glance anxiously at Edward's face, and then his own face hardened.　　While Caius had blundered through useless accusations and injudicious attempts to trigger the fight, Aromust have been coming up with a more effective strategy.　　Aro ghosted across the snow to the far western end of our line, stopping about ten yards from Amunand Kebi. The nearby wolves bristled angrily but held their positions.　　"Ah, Amun, my southern neighbor!" Aro said warmly. "It has been so long since you've visited me."Amun was motionless with anxiety, Kebi a statue at his side. "Time means little; I never notice itspassing," Amun said through unmoving lips.　　"So true," Aro agreed. "But maybe you had another reason to stay away?"Amun said nothing.　　"It can be terribly time-consuming to organize newcomers into a coven. I know that well! I'm grateful Ihave others to deal with the tedium. I'm glad your new additions have fit in so well. I would have loved tohave been introduced. I'm sure you were meaning to come to see me soon.""Of course," Amun said, his tone so emotionless that it was impossible to tell if there was any fear orsarcasm in his assent.　　"Oh well, we're all together now! Isn't it lovely?"Amun nodded, his face blank.　　"But the reason for your presence here is not as pleasant, unfortunately. Carlisle called on you towitness?""Yes.""And what did you witness for him?"Amun spoke with the same cold lack of emotion. "I've observed the child in question. It was evidentalmost immediately that she was not an immortal child—""Perhaps we should define our terminology," Aro interrupted, "now that there seem to be newclassifications. By immortal child, you mean of course a human child who had been bitten and thustransformed into a vampire.""Yes, that's what I meant.""What else did you observe about the child?""The same things that you surely saw in Edward's mind. That the child is his biologically. That she grows.　　That she learns.""Yes, yes," Aro said, a hint of impatience in his otherwise amiable tone. "But specifically in your fewweeks here, what did you see?"Amun's brow furrowed. "That she grows... quickly."Aro smiled. "And do you believe that she should be allowed to live?"A hiss escaped my lips, and I was not alone. Half the vampires in our line echoed my protest. The soundwas a low sizzle of fury hanging in the air. Across the meadow, a few of the Volturi witnesses made thesame noise. Edward stepped back and wrapped a restraining hand around my wrist.　　Aro did not turn to the noise, but Amun glanced around uneasily.　　"I did not come to make judgments," he equivocated.　　Aro laughed lightly. "Just your opinion."Amun's chin lifted. "I see no danger in the child. She learns even more swiftly than she grows."Aro nodded, considering. After a moment, he turned away.　　"Aro?" Amun called.　　Aro whirled back. "Yes, friend?""I gave my witness. I have no more business here. My mate and I would like to take our leave now."Aro smiled warmly. "Of course. I'm so glad we were able to chat for a bit. And I'm sure we'll see eachother again soon."Amun's lips were a tight line as he inclined his head once, acknowledging the barely concealed threat. Hetouched Kebi's arm, and then the two of them ran quickly to the southern edge of the meadow anddisappeared into the trees. I knew they wouldn't stop running for a very long time.　　Aro was gliding back along the length of our line to the east, his guards hovering tensely. He stoppedwhen he was in front of Siobhan's massive form.　　"Hello, dear Siobhan. You are as lovely as ever."Siobhan inclined her head, waiting.　　"And you?" he asked. "Would you answer my questions the same way Amun has?""I would," Siobhan said. "But I would perhaps add a little more. Renesmee understands the limitations.　　She's no danger to humans—she blends in better than we do. She poses no threat of exposure.""Can you think of none?" Aro asked soberly.　　Edward growled, a low ripping sound deep in his throat.　　Caius's cloudy crimson eyes brightened.　　Renata reached out protectively toward her master.　　And Garrett freed Kate to take a step forward, ignoring Kate's hand as she tried to caution him thistime.　　Siobhan answered slowly, "I don't think I follow you."Aro drifted lightly back, casually, but toward the rest of his guard. Renata, Felix, and Demetri werecloser than his shadow.　　"There is no broken law," Aro said in a placating voice, but every one of us could hear that aqualification was coming. I fought back the rage that tried to claw its way up my throat and snarl out mydefiance. I hurled the fury into my shield, thickening it, making sure everyone was protected.　　"No broken law," Aro repeated. "However, does it follow then that there is no danger? No." He shookhis head gently. "That is a separate issue."The only response was the tightening of already stretched nerves, and Maggie, at the fringes of our bandof fighters, shaking her head with slow anger.　　Aro paced thoughtfully, looking as if he floated rather than touched the ground with his feet. I noticedevery pass took him closer to the protection of his guard.　　"She is unique... utterly, impossibly unique. Such a waste it would be, to destroy something so lovely.　　Especially when we could learn so much .. ." He sighed, as if unwilling to go on. "But there is danger,danger that cannot simply be ignored."No one answered his assertion. It was dead silent as he continued in a monologue that sounded as if hespoke it for himself only.　　"How ironic it is that as the humans advance, as their faith in science grows and controls their world, themore free we are from discovery. Yet, as we become ever more uninhibited by their disbelief in thesupernatural, they become strong enough in their technologies that, if they wished, they could actuallypose a threat to us, even destroy some of us.　　"For thousands and thousands of years, our secrecy has been more a matter of convenience, of ease,than of actual safety. This last raw, angry century has given birth to weapons of such power that theyendanger even immortals. Now our status as mere myth in truth protects us from these weak creatureswe hunt.　　"Thisamazingchild"—he lifted his hand palm down as if to rest it on Renesmee, though he was fortyyards from her now, almost within the Volturi formation again—"if we could but know herpotential—know with absolute certainty that she could always remain shrouded within the obscurity thatprotects us. But we know nothing of what she will become! Her own parents are plagued by fears of herfuture. We cannot know what she will grow to be." He paused, looking first at our witnesses, and then,meaningfully, at his own. His voice gave a good imitation of sounding torn by his words.　　Still looking at his own witnesses, he spoke again. "Only the known is safe. Only the known is tolerable.　　The unknown is... a vulnerability."Caius's smile widened viciously.　　"You're reaching, Aro," Carlisle said in a bleak voice.　　"Peace, friend." Aro smiled, his face as kind, his voice as gentle, as ever. "Let us not be hasty. Let uslook at this from every side.""May I offer a side to be considered?" Garrett petitioned in a level tone, taking another step forward.　　"Nomad," Aro said, nodding in permission.　　Garrett's chin lifted. His eyes focused on the huddled mass at the end of the meadow, and he spokedirectly to the Volturi witnesses.　　"I came here at Carlisle's request, as the others, to witness," he said. "That is certainly no longernecessary, with regard to the child. We all see what she is.　　"I stayed to witness something else. You." He jabbed his finger toward the wary vampires. "Two of youI know—Makenna, Charles—and I can see that many of you others are also wanderers, roamers likemyself. Answering to none. Think carefully on what I tell you now.　　'These ancient ones did not come here for justice as they told you. We suspected as much, and now ithas been proved. They came, misled, but with a valid excuse for their action. Witness now as they seekflimsy excuses to continue their true mission. Witness them struggle to find a justification for their truepurpose—to destroy this family here." He gestured toward Carlisle and Tanya.　　"The Volturi come to erase what they perceive as the competition. Perhaps, like me, you look at thisclan's golden eyes and marvel. They are difficult to understand, it's true. But the ancient ones look andsee something besides their strange choice. They see power.　　"I have witnessed the bonds within this family—I say family and not coven. These strange golden-eyedones deny their very natures. But in return have they found something worth even more, perhaps, thanmere gratification of desire? I've made a little study of them in my time here, and it seems to me thatintrinsic to this intense family binding—that which makes them possible at all—is the peaceful character ofthis life of sacrifice. There is no aggression here like we all saw in the large southern clans that grew anddiminished so quickly in their wild feuds. There is no thought for domination. And Aro knows this betterthan I do."I watched Aro's face as Garrett's words condemned him, waiting tensely for some response. But Aro'sface was only politely amused, as if waiting for a tantrum-throwing child to realize that no one was payingattention to his histrionics.　　"Carlisle assured us all, when he told us what was coming, that he did not call us here to fight. Thesewitnesses"—Garrett pointed to Siobhan and Liam—"agreed to give evidence, to slow the Volturiadvance with their presence so that Carlisle would get the chance to present his case.　　"But some of us wondered"—his eyes flashed to Eleazars face—"if Carlisle having truth on his sidewould be enough to stop the so-called justice. Are the Volturi here to protect the safety of our secrecy,or to protect their own power? Did they come to destroy an illegal creation, or a way of life? Could theybe satisfied when the danger turned out to be no more than a misunderstanding? Or would they push theissue without the excuse of justice?　　"We have the answer to all these questions. We heard it in Aro's lying words—we have one with a giftof knowing such things for certain—and we see it now in Caius's eager smile. Their guard is just amindless weapon, a tool in their masters' quest for domination.　　"So now there are more questions, questions that you must answer. Who rules you, nomads? Do youanswer to someone's will besides your own? Are you free to choose your path, or will the Volturi decidehow you will live?　　"I came to witness. I stay to fight. The Volturi care nothing for the death of the child. They seek thedeath of our free will."He turned, then, to face the ancients. "So come, I say! Let's hear no more lying rationalizations. Behonest in your intents as we will be honest in ours. We will defend our freedom. You will or will notattack it. Choose now, and let these witnesses see the true issue debated here."Once more he looked to the Volturi witnesses, his eyes probing each face. The power of his words wasevident in their expressions. "You might consider joining us. If you think the Volturi will let you live to tellthis tale, you aremistaken. We may all be destroyed"—he shrugged—"but then again, maybe not. Perhaps we are onmore equal footing than they know. Perhaps the Volturi have finally met their match. I promise you this,though—if we fall, so do you."He ended his heated speech by stepping back to Kate's side and then sliding forward in a half-crouch,prepared for the onslaught.　　Aro smiled. "Avery pretty speech, my revolutionary friend."Garrett remained poised for attack. "Revolutionary?" he growled. "Who am I revolting against, might Iask? Are you my king? Do you wish me to call you master, too, like your sycophantic guard?""Peace, Garrett," Aro said tolerantly. "I meant only to refer to your time of birth. Still a patriot, I see."Garrett glared back furiously.　　"Let us ask our witnesses," Aro suggested. "Let us hear their thoughts before we make our decision. Tellus, friends"—and he turned his back casually on us, moving a few yards toward his mass of nervousobservers hovering even closer now to the edge of the forest—"what do you think of all this? I canassure you the child is not what we feared. Do we take the risk and let the child live? Do we put ourworld in jeopardy to preserve their family intact? Or does earnest Garrett have the right of it? Will youjoin them in a fight against our sudden quest for dominion?"The witnesses met his gaze with careful faces. One, a small black-haired woman, looked briefly at thedark blond male at her side.　　"Are those our only choices?" she asked suddenly, gaze flashing back to Aro. "Agree with you, or fightagainst you?""Of course not, most charming Makenna," Aro said, appearing horrified that anyone could come to thatconclusion. "You may go in peace, of course, as Amun did, even if you disagree with the council'sdecision."Makenna looked at her mate's face again, and he nodded minutely.　　"We did not come here for a fight." She paused, exhaled, then said, "We came here to witness. And ourwitness is that this condemned family is innocent. Everything that Garrett claimed is the truth.""Ah," Aro said sadly. "I'm sorry you see us in that way. But such is the nature of our work.""It is not what I see, but what I feel," Makenna's maize-haired mate spoke in a high, nervous voice. Heglanced at Garrett. "Garrett said they have ways of knowing lies. I, too, know when I am hearing thetruth, and when I am not." With frightened eyes he moved closer to his mate, waiting for Aro's reaction.　　"Do not fear us, friend Charles. No doubt the patriot truly believes what he says," Aro chuckled lightly,and Charles's eyes narrowed.　　"That is our witness," Makenna said. "We're leaving now."She and Charles backed away slowly, not turning before they were lost from view in the trees. Oneother stranger began to retreat the same way, then three more darted after him.　　I evaluated the thirty-seven vampires that stayed. A few of them appeared just too confused to make thedecision. But the majority of them seemed only too aware of the direction this confrontation had taken. Iguessed that they were giving up a head start in favor of knowing exactly who would be chasing afterthem.　　I was sure Aro saw the same thing I did. He turned away, walking back to his guard with a measuredpace. He stopped in front of them and addressed them in a clear voice.　　"We are outnumbered, dearest ones," he said. "We can expect no outside help. Should we leave thisquestion undecided to save ourselves?""No, master," they whispered in unison.　　"Is the protection of our world worth perhaps the loss of some of our number?""Yes," they breathed. "We are not afraid."Aro smiled and turned to his black-clad companions.　　"Brothers," Aro said somberly, "there is much to consider here.""Let us counsel," Caius said eagerly.　　"Let us counsel," Marcus repeated in an uninterested tone.　　Aro turned his back to us again, facing the other ancients. They joined hands to form a black-shroudedtriangle.　　As soon as Aro's attention was engaged in the silent counsel, two more of their witnesses disappearedsilently into the forest. I hoped, for their sakes, that they were fast.　　This was it. Carefully, I loosened Renesmee's arms from my neck.　　"You remember what I told you?"Tears welled in her eyes, but she nodded. "I love you," she whispered.　　Edward was watching us now, his topaz eyes wide. Jacob stared at us from the corner of his big darkeye.　　"I love you, too," I said, and then I touched her locket. "More than my own life." I kissed her forehead.　　Jacob whined uneasily.　　I stretched up on my toes and whispered into his ear. "Wait until they're totally distracted, then run withher. Get as far from this place as you possibly can. When you've gone as far as you can on foot, she haswhat you need to get you in the air."Edward's and Jacob's faces were almost identical masks of horror, despite the fact that one of them wasan animal.　　Renesmee reached for Edward, and he took her in his arms. They hugged each other tightly.　　"This is what you kept from me?" he whispered over her head.　　"From Aro," I breathed.　　"Alice?"I nodded.　　His face twisted with understanding and pain. Had that been the expression on my face when I'd finallyput together Alice's clues?　　Jacob was growling quietly, a low rasp that was as even and unbroken as a purr. His hackles were stiffand histeeth exposed.　　Edward kissed Renesmee's forehead and both her cheeks, then he lifted her to Jacob's shoulder. Shescrambled agilely onto his back, pulling herself into place with handfuls of his fur, and fit herself easily intothe dip between his massive shoulder blades.　　Jacob turned to me, his expressive eyes full of agony, the rumbling growl still grating through his chest.　　"You're the only one we could ever trust her with," I murmured to him. "If you didn't love her so much, Icould never bear this. I know you can protect her, Jacob."He whined again, and dipped his head to butt it against my shoulder.　　"I know," I whispered. "I love you, too, Jake. You'll always be my best man."A tear the size of a baseball rolled into the russet fur beneath his eye.　　Edward leaned his head against the same shoulder where he'd placed Renesmee. "Goodbye, Jacob, mybrother... my son."The others were not oblivious to the farewell scene. Their eyes were locked on the silent black triangle,but I could tell they were listening.　　"Is there no hope, then?" Carlisle whispered. There was no fear in his voice. Just determination andacceptance.　　"There is absolutely hope," I murmured back. It could be true, I told myself. "I only know my ownfate."Edward took my hand. He knew that he was included. When I said my fate, there was no question thatI meant the two of us. We were just halves of the whole.　　Esme's breath was ragged behind me. She moved past us, touching our faces as she passed, to standbeside Carlisle and hold his hand.　　Suddenly, we were surrounded by murmured goodbyes and I love you's.　　"If we live through this," Garrett whispered to Kate, "I'll follow you anywhere, woman.""Now he tells me," she muttered.　　Rosalie and Emmett kissed quickly but passionately.　　Tia caressed Benjamin's face. He smiled back cheerfully, catching her hand and holding it against hischeek.　　I didn't see all the expressions of love and pain. I was distracted by a sudden fluttering pressure againstthe outside of my shield. I couldn't tell where it came from, but it felt like it was directed at the edges ofour group, Siobhan and Liam particularly. The pressure did no damage, and then it was gone.　　There was no change in the silent, still forms of the counseling ancients. But perhaps there was somesignal I'd missed.　　"Get ready," I whispered to the others. "It's starting."
    Chapter 38 Power
    "Chelsea is trying to break our bindings," Edward whispered. "But she can't find them. She can't feel ushere. . . ." His eyes cut to me. "Are you doing that?"I smiled grimly at him. "I am all over this."Edward lurched away from me suddenly, his hand reaching out toward Carlisle. At the same time, I felta much sharper jab against the shield where it wrapped protectively around Carlisle's light. It wasn'tpainful, but it wasn't pleasant, either.　　"Carlisle? Are you all right?" Edward gasped frantically.　　"Yes. Why?""Jane," Edward answered.　　The moment that he said her name, a dozen pointed attacks hit in a second, stabbing all over the elasticshield, aimed at twelve different bright spots. I flexed, making sure the shield was undamaged. It didn'tseem like Jane had been able to pierce it. I glanced around quickly; everyone was fine.　　"Incredible," Edward said.　　"Why aren't they waiting for the decision?" Tanya hissed.　　"Normal procedure," Edward answered brusquely. "They usually incapacitate those on trial so they can'tescape."I looked across at Jane, who was staring at our group with furious disbelief. I was pretty sure that,besides me, she'd never seen anyone remain standing through her fiery assault.　　It probably wasn't very mature. But I figured it would take Aro about half a second to guess—if hehadn't already—that my shield was more powerful than Edward had known; I already had a big target onmy forehead and there was really no point in trying to keep the extent of what I could do a secret. So Igrinned a huge, smug smile rightat Jane.　　Her eyes narrowed, and I felt another stab of pressure, this time directed at me.　　I pulled my lips wider, showing my teeth.　　Jane let out a high-pitched scream of a snarl. Everyone jumped, even the disciplined guard. Everyonebut the ancients, who didn't so much as look up from their conference. Her twin caught her arm as shecrouched to spring.　　The Romanians started chuckling with dark anticipation.　　"I told you this was our time," Vladimir said to Stefan.　　"Just look at the witch's face," Stefan chortled.　　Alec patted his sister's shoulder soothingly, then tucked her under his arm. He turned his face to us,perfectly smooth, completely angelic.　　I waited for some pressure, some sign of his attack, but I felt nothing. He continued to stare in ourdirection, his pretty face composed. Was he attacking? Was he getting through my shield? Was I the onlyone who could still see him? I clutched at Edward's hand.　　"Are you okay?" I choked out.　　"Yes," he whispered.　　"Is Alec trying?"Edward nodded. "His gift is slower than Jane's. It creeps. It will touch us in a few seconds."I saw it then, when I had a clue of what to look for.　　A strange clear haze was oozing across the snow, nearly invisible against the white. It reminded me of amirage—a slight warping of the view, a hint of a shimmer. I pushed my shield out from Carlisle and therest of the front line, afraid to have the slinking mist too close when it hit. What if it stole right through myintangible protection? Should we run?　　A low rumbling murmured through the ground under our feet, and a gust of wind blew the snow intosudden flurries between our position and the Voituri's. Benjamin had seen the creeping threat, too, andnow he tried to blow the mist away from us. The snow made it easy to see where he threw the wind, butthe mist didn't react in any way. It was like air blowing harmlessly through a shadow; the shadow wasimmune.　　The triangular formation of the ancients finally broke apart when, with a racking groan, a deep, narrowfissure opened in a long zigzag across the middle of the clearing. The earth rocked under my feet for amoment. The drifts of snow plummeted into the hole, but the mist skipped right across it, as untouched bygravity as it had been by wind.　　Aro and Caius watched the opening earth with wide eyes. Marcus looked in the same direction withoutemotion.　　They didn't speak; they waited, too, as the mist approached us. The wind shrieked louder but didn'tchange the course of the mist. Jane was smiling now.　　And then the mist hit a wall.　　I could taste it as soon as it touched my shield—it had a dense, sweet, cloying flavor, it made meremember dimly the numbness of Novocain on my tongue.　　The mist curled upward, seeking a breach, a weakness. It found none. The fingers of searching hazetwisted upward and around, trying to find a way in, and in the process illustrating the astonishing size ofthe protective screen.　　There were gasps on both sides of Benjamin's gorge.　　"Well done, Bella!'7Benjamin cheered in a low voice.　　My smile returned.　　I could see Alec's narrowed eyes, doubt on his face for the first time as his mist swirled harmlesslyaround the edges of my shield.　　And then I knew that I could do this. Obviously, I would be the number-one priority, the first one to die,but as long as I held, we were on more than equal footing with the Volturi. We still had Benjamin andZafrina; they had no supernatural help at all. As long as I held.　　Tm going to have to concentrate," I whispered to Edward. "When it comes to hand to hand, it's going tobe harder to keep the shield around the right people.""I'll keep them off you.""No. You have to get to Demetri. Zafrina will keep them away from me."Zafrina nodded solemnly. "No one will touch this young one," she promised Edward.　　"I'd go after Jane and Alec myself, but I can do more good here.""Jane's mine," Kate hissed. "She needs a taste of her own medicine.""And Alec owes me many lives, but I will settle for his," Vladimir growled from the other side. "He'smine.""I just want Caius," Tanya said evenly.　　The others started divvying up opponents, too, but they were quickly interrupted.　　Aro, staring calmly at Alec's ineffective mist, finally spoke.　　"Before we vote," he began.　　I shook my head angrily. I was tired of this charade. The bloodlust was igniting in me again, and I wassorry that I would help the others more by standing still. I wanted to fight.　　"Let me remind you," Aro continued, "whatever the council's decision, there need be no violence here."Edward snarled out a dark laugh.　　Aro stared at him sadly. "It will be a regrettable waste to our kind to lose any of you. But you especially,young Edward, and your newborn mate. The Volturi would be glad to welcome many of you into ourranks. Bella, Benjamin, Zafrina, Kate. There are many choices before you. Consider them."Chelsea's attempt to sway us fluttered impotently against my shield. Aro's gaze swept across our hardeyes, looking for any indication of hesitation. From his expression, he found none.　　I knew he was desperate to keep Edward and me, to imprison us the way he had hoped to enslaveAlice. But this fight was too big. He would not win if I lived. I was fiercely glad to be so powerful that Ileft him no way not to kill me.　　"Let us vote, then," he said with apparent reluctance.　　Caius spoke with eager haste. "The child is an unknown quantity. There is no reasonto allow sucha riskto exist. It must be destroyed, along with all who protect it." He smiled in expectation.　　I fought back a shriek of defiance to answer his cruel smirk.　　Marcus lifted his uncaring eyes, seeming to look through us as he voted.　　"I see no immediate danger. The child is safe enough for now. We can always reevaluate later. Let usleave in peace." His voice was even fainter than his brothers' feathery sighs.　　None of the guard relaxed their ready positions at his disagreeing words. Caius's anticipatory grin didnot falter. It was as if Marcus hadn't spoken atall.　　"I must make the deciding vote, it seems," Aro mused.　　Suddenly, Edward stiffened at my side. "Yes!" he hissed.　　I risked a glance at him. His face glowed with an expression of triumph that I didn't understand—it wasthe expression an angel of destruction might wear while the world burned. Beautiful and terrifying.　　There was a low reaction from the guard, an uneasy murmur.　　"Aro?" Edward called, nearly shouted, undisguised victory in his voice.　　Aro hesitated fora second, assessing this new mood warily before he answered. "Yes, Edward? Youhave something further... ?""Perhaps," Edward said pleasantly, controlling his unexplained excitement. "First, if I could clarify onepoint?""Certainly," Aro said, raising his eyebrows, nothing now but polite interest in his tone. My teeth groundtogether; Aro was never more dangerous than when he was gracious.　　"The danger you foresee from my daughter—this stems entirely from our inability to guess how she willdevelop? That is the crux of the matter?""Yes, friend Edward," Aro agreed. "If we could but be positive... be sure that, as she grows, she will beable to stay concealed from the human world—not endanger the safety of our obscurity ..." He trailedoff, shrugging.　　"So, if we could only know for sure," Edward suggested, "exactly what she will become... then therewould be no need for a council at all?""If there was some way to be absolutely sure," Aro agreed, his feathery voice slightly more shrill. Hecouldn't see where Edward was leading him. Neither could I. "Then, yes, there would be no question todebate.""And we would part in peace, good friends once again?" Edward asked with a hint of irony.　　Even more shrill. "Of course, my young friend. Nothing would please me more."Edward chuckled exultantly. "Then I do have something more to offer."Aro's eyes narrowed. "She is absolutely unique. Her future can only be guessed at.""Not absolutely unique," Edward disagreed. "Rare, certainly, but not one of a kind."I fought the shock, the sudden hope springing to life, as it threatened to distract me. The sickly-lookingmist still swirled around the edges of my shield. And, as I struggled to focus, I felt again the sharp,stabbing pressure againstmy protective hold.　　"Aro, would you ask Jane to stop attacking my wife?" Edward asked courteously. "We are stilldiscussing evidence."Aro raised one hand. "Peace, dear ones. Let us hear him out."The pressure disappeared. Jane bared her teeth at me; I couldn't help grinning back at her.　　"Why don't you join us, Alice?" Edward called loudly.　　"Alice," Esme whispered in shock.　　Alice!　　Alice, Alice, Alice!　　"Alice!" "Alice!" other voices murmured around me.　　"Alice," Aro breathed.　　Relief and violent joy surged through me. It took all my will to keep the shield where it was. Alec's miststill tested, seeking a weakness—Jane would see if I left any holes.　　And then I heard them running through the forest, flying, closing the distance as quickly as they couldwith no slowing effort at silence.　　Both sides were motionless in expectation. The Volturi witnesses scowled in fresh confusion.　　Then Alice danced into the clearing from the southwest, and I felt like the bliss of seeing her face againmight knock me off my feet. Jasper was only inches behind her, his sharp eyes fierce. Close after themran three strangers; the first was a tall, muscular female with wild dark hair—obviously Kachiri. She hadthe same elongated limbs and features as the other Amazons, even more pronounced in her case.　　The next was a small olive-toned female vampire with a long braid of black hair bobbing against herback. Her deep burgundy eyes flitted nervously around the confrontation before her.　　And the last was a young man... not quite as fast nor quite as fluid in his run. His skin was an impossiblerich, dark brown. His wary eyes flashed across the gathering, and they were the color of warm teak. Hishair was black and braided, too, like the woman's, though not as long. He was beautiful.　　As he neared us, a new sound sent shock waves through the watching crowd—the sound of anotherheartbeat, accelerated with exertion.　　Alice leaped lightly over the edges of the dissipating mist that lapped at my shield and came to a sinuousstop at Edward's side. I reached out to touch her arm, and so did Edward, Esme, Carlisle. There wasn'ttime for any other welcome. Jasper and the others followed her through the shield.　　All the guard watched, speculation in their eyes, as the latecomers crossed the invisible border withoutdifficulty. The brawny ones, Felix and the others like him, focused their suddenly hopeful eyes on me.　　They had not been sure of what my shield repelled, but it was clear now that it would not stop a physicalattack. As soon as Aro gave the order, the blitz would ensue, me the only object. I wondered how manyZafrina would be able to blind, and how much that would slow them. Long enough for Kate and Vladimirto take Jane and Alec out of the equation? That was all Icould ask for.　　Edward, despite his absorption in the coup he was directing, stiffened furiously in response to theirthoughts. He controlled himself and spoke to Aro again.　　"Alice has been searching for her own witnesses these last weeks," he said to the ancient. "And she doesnot come back empty-handed. Alice, why don't you introduce the witnesses you've brought?"Caius snarled. "The time for witnesses is past! Cast your vote, Aro!"Aro raised one finger to silence his brother, his eyes glued to Alice's face.　　Alice stepped forward lightly and introduced the strangers. "This is Huilen and her nephew, Nahuel."Hearing her voice... it was like she'd never left.　　Caius's eyes tightened as Alice named the relationship between the newcomers. The Volturi witnesseshissed amongst themselves. The vampire world was changing, and everyone could feel it.　　"Speak, Huilen," Aro commanded. "Give us the witness you were brought to bear."The slight woman looked to Alice nervously. Alice nodded in encouragement, and Kachiri put her longhand on the little vampire's shoulder.　　"I am Huilen," the woman announced in clear but strangely accented English. As she continued, it wasapparent she had prepared herself to tell this story, that she had practiced. It flowed like a well-knownnursery rhyme. "A century and a half ago, I lived with my people, the Mapuche. My sister was Pire. Ourparents named her after the snow on the mountains because of her fair skin. And she was very beautiful—too beautiful. She came to me one day in secret and told me of the angel that found her in the woods,that visited her by night. I warned her." Huilen shook her head mournfully. "As if the bruises on her skinwere not warning enough. I knew it was the Libishomen of our legends, but she would not listen. Shewas bewitched.　　"She told me when she was sure her dark angel's child was growing inside her. I didn't try to discourageher from her plan to run away—I knew even our father and mother would agree that the child must bedestroyed, Pire with it. I went with her into the deepest parts of the forest. She searched for her demonangel but found nothing, i cared for her, hunted for her when her strength failed. She ate the animals raw,drinking their blood. I needed no more confirmation of what she carried in her womb. I hoped to saveher life before I killed the monster.　　"But she loved the child inside her. She called him Nahuel, after the jungle cat, when he grew strong andbroke her bones—and loved him still.　　"I could not save her. The child ripped his way free of her, and she died quickly, begging all the whilethat I would care for her Nahuel. Her dying wish—and I agreed.　　"He bit me, though, when I tried to lift him from her body. I crawled away into the jungle to die. I didn'tget far—the pain was too much. But he found me; the newborn child struggled through the underbrush tomy side and waited for me. When the pain ended, he was curled against my side, sleeping.　　"I cared for him until he was able to hunt for himself. We hunted the villages around our forest, staying toourselves. We have never come so far from our home, but Nahuel wished to see the child here."Huilen bowed her head when she was finished and moved back so she was partially hidden behindKachiri.　　Aro's lips were pursed. He stared at the dark-skinned youth.　　"Nahuel, you are one hundred and fifty years old?" he questioned.　　"Give or take a decade," he answered in a clear, beautifully warm voice. His accent was barelynoticeable. "We don't keep track.""And you reached maturity at what age?""About seven years after my birth, more or less, I was full grown.""You have not changed since then?"Nahuel shrugged. "Not that I've noticed."I felt a shudder tremble through Jacob's body. I didn't want to think about this yet. I would wait till thedanger was past and I could concentrate.　　"And your diet?" Aro pressed, seeming interested in spite of himself.　　"Mostly blood, but some human food, too. I can survive on either.""You were able to create an immortal?" As Aro gestured to Huilen, his voice was abruptly intense. Irefocused on my shield; perhaps he was seeking a new excuse.　　"Yes, but none of the rest can."A shocked murmur ran through all three groups.　　Aro's eyebrows shot up. "The rest?""My sisters." Nahuel shrugged again.　　Aro stared wildly for a moment before composing his face.　　"Perhaps you would tell us the rest of your story, for there seems to be more."Nahuel frowned.　　"My father came looking for me a few years after my mother's death." His handsome face distortedslightly. "He was pleased to find me." Nahuel's tone suggested the feeling was not mutual. "He had twodaughters, but no sons. He expected me to join him, as my sisters had.　　"He was surprised I was not alone. My sisters are not venomous, but whether that's due to gender or arandom chance... who knows? I already had my family with Huilen, and I was not interested*—hetwisted the word—"in making a change. I see him from time to time. I have a new sister; she reachedmaturity about ten years back.""Your father's name?" Caius asked through gritted teeth.　　"Joham," Nahuel answered. "He considers himself a scientist. He thinks he's creating a new super-race."He made no attempt to disguise the disgust in his tone.　　Caius looked at me. "Your daughter, is she venomous?" he demanded harshly.　　"No," I responded. Nahuel's head snapped up at Aro's question, and his teak eyes turned to bore intomy face.　　Caius looked to Aro for confirmation, but Aro was absorbed in his own thoughts. He pursed his lips andstared at Carlisle, and then Edward, and at last his eyes rested on me.　　Caius growled. "We take care of the aberration here, and then follow it south," he urged Aro.　　Aro stared into my eyes for a long, tense moment. I had no idea what he was searching for, or what hefound, but after he had measured me for that moment, something in his face changed, a faint shift in theset of his mouth and eyes, and I knew that Aro had made his decision.　　"Brother," he said softly to Caius. "There appears to be no danger. This is an unusual development, but Isee no threat. These half-vampire children are much like us, it appears.""Is that your vote?" Caius demanded.　　"It is."Caius scowled. "And this Joham? This immortal so fond of experimentation?""Perhaps we should speak with him," Aro agreed.　　"Stop Joham if you will," Nahuel said flatly. "But leave my sisters be. They are innocent."Aro nodded, his expression solemn. And then he turned back to his guard with a warm smile.　　"Dear ones," he called. "We do not fight today."The guard nodded in unison and straightened out of their ready positions. The mist dissipated swiftly, butI held my shield in place. Maybe this was another trick.　　I analyzed their expressions as Aro turned back to us. His face was as benign as ever, but unlike before,I sensed a strange blankness behind the fagade. As if his scheming was over. Caius was clearly incensed,but his rage was turned inward now; he was resigned. Marcus looked... bored; there really was no otherword for it. The guard was impassive and disciplined again; there were no individuals among them, justthe whole. They were in formation, ready to depart. The Volturi witnesses were still wary; one afteranother, they departed, scattering into the woods. As their numbers dwindled, the remaining sped up.　　Soon they were all gone.　　Aro held his hands out to us, almost apologetic. Behind him, the larger part of the guard, along withCaius, Marcus, and the silent, mysterious wives, were already drifting quickly away, their formationprecise once again. Only the three that seemed to be his personal guardians lingered with him.　　"I'm so glad this could be resolved without violence," he said sweetly. "My friend, Carlisle—howpleased I am to call you friend again! I hope there are no hard feelings. I know you understand the strictburden that our duty places on our shoulders.""Leave in peace, Aro," Carlisle said stiffly. "Please remember that we still have our anonymity to protecthere, and keep your guard from hunting in this region.""Of course, Carlisle," Aro assured him. "I am sorry to earn your disapproval, my dear friend. Perhaps, intime, you will forgive me.""Perhaps, in time, if you prove a friend to us again."Aro bowed his head, the picture of remorse, and drifted backward for a moment before he turnedaround. We watched in silence as the last four Volturi disappeared into the trees.　　It was very quiet. I did not drop my shield.　　"Is it really over?" I whispered to Edward.　　His smile was huge. "Yes. They've given up. Like all bullies, they're cowards underneath theswagger.'7He chuckled.　　Alice laughed with him. "Seriously, people. They're not coming back. Everybody can relax now."There was another beat of silence.　　"Of all the rotten luck," Stefan muttered.　　And then it hit.　　Cheers erupted. Deafening howls filled the clearing. Maggie pounded Siobhan on the back. Rosalie andEmmett kissed again—longer and more ardently than before. Benjamin and Tia were locked in eachother's arms, as were Carmen and Eleazar. Esme held Alice and Jasper in a tight embrace. Carlisle waswarmly thanking the South American newcomers who had saved us all. Kachin stood very close toZafrina and Senna, their fingertips interlocked. Garrett picked Kate up off the ground and swung heraround in a circle.　　Stefan spit on the snow. Vladimir ground his teeth together with a sour expression.　　And I half-climbed the giant russet wolf to rip my daughter off his back and then crushed her to mychest. Edward's arms were around us in the same second.　　"Nessie, Nessie, Nessie," I crooned.　　Jacob laughed his big, barky laugh and poked the back of my head with his nose.　　"Shut up," I mumbled.　　"I get to stay with you?" Nessie demanded.　　"Forever," I promised her.　　We had forever. And Nessie was going to be fine and healthy and strong. Like the half-human Nahuel,in a hundred and fifty years she would still be young. And we would all be together.　　Happiness expanded like an explosion inside me—so extreme, so violent that I wasn't sure I'd survive it.　　"Forever," Edward echoed in my ear.　　I couldn't speak anymore. I lifted my head and kissed him with a passion that might possibly set theforest on fire.　　I wouldn't have noticed.
    Chapter 39 The Happily Ever After
    "So it was a combination of things there at the end, but what it really boiled down to was... Bella,"Edward was explaining. Our family and our two remaining guests sat in the Cullens' great room while theforest turned black outside the tall windows.　　Vladimir and Stefan had vanished before we'd stopped celebrating. They were extremely disappointedin the way things had turned out, but Edward said that they'd enjoyed the Volturi's cowardice almostenough to make up for their frustration.　　Benjamin and Tia were quick to follow after Amun and Kebi, anxious to let them know the outcome ofthe conflict; I was sure we would see them again—Benjamin and Tia, at least. None of the nomadslingered. Peter and Charlotte had a short conversation with Jasper, and then they were gone, too.　　The reunited Amazons had been anxious to return home as well—they had a difficult time being awayfrom their beloved rain forest—though they were more reluctant to leave than some of the others.　　"You must bring the child to see me," Zafrina had insisted. "Promise me, young one."Nessie had pressed her hand to my neck, pleading as well.　　"Of course, Zafrina," I'd agreed.　　"We shall be great friends, my Nessie," the wild woman had declared before leaving with her sisters.　　The Irish coven continued the exodus.　　"Well done, Siobhan," Carlisle complimented her as they said goodbye.　　"Ah, the power of wishful thinking," she answered sarcastically, rolling her eyes. And then she wasserious. "Of course, this isn't over. The Volturi won't forgive what happened here."Edward was the one to answer that. "They've been seriously shaken; their confidence is shattered. But,yes, I'm sure they'll recover from the blow someday. And then . . ." His eyes tightened. "I imagine they'lltry to pick us offseparately.""Alice will warn us when they intend to strike," Siobhan said in a sure voice. "And we'll gather again.　　Perhaps the time will come when our world is ready to be free of the Volturi altogether.""That time may come," Carlisle replied. "If it does, we'll stand together.""Yes, my friend, we will," Siobhan agreed. "And how can we fail, when /will it otherwise?" She let out agreat peal of laughter.　　"Exactly," Carlisle said. He and Siobhan embraced, and then he shook Liam's hand. "Try to find Alistairand tell him what happened. I'd hate to think of him hiding under a rock for the next decade."Siobhan laughed again. Maggie hugged both Nessie and me, and then the Irish coven was gone.　　The Denalis were the last to leave, Garrett with them—as he would be from now on, I was fairly sure.　　The atmosphere of celebration was too much for Tanya and Kate. They needed time to grieve for theirlost sister.　　Huilen and Nahuel were the ones who stayed, though I had expected those last two to go back with theAmazons. Carlisle was deep in fascinated conversation with Huilen; Nahuel sat close beside her, listeningwhile Edward told the rest of us the story of the conflict as only he knew it.　　"Alice gave Aro the excuse he needed to get out of the fight. If he hadn't been so terrified of Bella, heprobably would have gone ahead with their original plan.""Terrified?" I said skeptically. "Of me?"He smiled at me with a look I didn't entirely recognize—it was tender, but also awed and evenexasperated. "When will you ever see yourself clearly?" he said softly. Then he spoke louder, to theothers as well as to me. "The Volturi haven't fought a fair fight in about twenty-five hundred years. Andthey've never, never fought one where they were at a disadvantage. Especially since they gained Jane andAlec, they've only been involved with unopposed slaughterings.　　"You should have seen how we looked to them! Usually, Alec cuts off all sense and feeling from theirvictims while they go through the charade of a counsel. That way, no one can run when the verdict isgiven. But there we stood, ready, waiting, outnumbering them, with gifts of our own while their gifts wererendered useless by Bella. Aro knew that with Zafrina on our side, they would be the blind ones whenthe battle commenced. I'm sure our numbers would have been pretty severely decimated, but they weresure that theirs would be, too. There was even a good possibility that they would lose. They've neverdealt with that possibility before. They didn't deal with it well today.""Hard to feel confident when you're surrounded by horse-sized wolves," Emmett laughed, pokingJacob's arm.　　Jacob flashed a grin at him.　　"It was the wolves that stopped them in the first place," I said.　　"Sure was," Jacob agreed.　　"Absolutely," Edward agreed. "That was another sight they've never seen. The true Children of theMoon rarely move in packs, and they are never much in control of themselves. Sixteen enormousregimented wolves was a surprise they weren't prepared for. Caius is actually terrified of werewolves. Healmost lost a fight with one a fewthousand years ago and never got over it.""So there are real werewolves?" I asked. "With the full moon and silver bullets and all that?"Jacob snorted. "Real. Does that make me imaginary?""You know what I mean.""Full moon, yes," Edward said. "Silver bullets, no—that was just another one of those myths to makehumans feel like they had a sporting chance. There aren't very many of them left. Caius has had themhunted into near extinction.""And you never mentioned this because... ?""It never came up."I rolled my eyes, and Alice laughed, leaning forward—she was tucked under Edward's other arm—towink at me.　　I glared back.　　I loved her insanely, of course. But now that I'd had a chance to realize that she was really home, thather defection was only a ruse because Edward had to believe that she'd abandoned us, I was beginningto feel pretty irritated with her. Alice had some explaining to do.　　Alice sighed. "Just get it off your chest, Bella.""How could you do that to me, Alice?""It was necessary.""Necessary!" I exploded. "You had me totally convinced that we were all going to die! I've been awreck for weeks.""It might have gone that way," she said calmly. "In which case you needed to be prepared to saveNessie."Instinctively, I held Nessie—asleep now on my lap—tighter in my arms.　　"But you knew there were other ways, too," I accused. "You knew there was hope. Did it ever occur toyou that you could have told me everything? I know Edward had to think we were at a dead end forAro's sake, but you could have told me."She looked at me speculatively for a moment. "I don't think so," she said. "You're just not that good anactress.""This was about my acting skills?""Oh, take it down an octave, Bella. Do you have any idea how complicated Ms was to set up? Icouldn't even be sure that someone like Nahuel existed—all I knew was that I would be looking forsomething I couldn't see! Try to imagine searching for a blind spot—not the easiest thing I've ever done.　　Plus we had to send back the key witnesses, like we weren't in enough of a hurry. And then keeping myeyes open all the time in case you decided to throw me any more instructions. At some point you're goingto have to tell me what exactly is in Rio. Before any of that, I had to try to see every trick the Volturimight come in with and give you what few clues I could so you would be ready for their strategy, and Ionly had just a few hours to trace out all the possibilities. Most of all, I had to make sure you'd all believethat I was ditching out on you, because Aro had to be positive that you had nothing left up your sleevesor he never would have committed to an out the way he did. And if you think I didn't feel like aschmuck—""Okay, okay!" I interrupted. "Sorry! I know it was rough for you, too. It's just that... well, I missed youlike crazy, Alice. Don't do that to me again."Alice's trilling laugh rang through the room, and we all smiled to hear that music once more. "I missedyou, too, Bella. So forgive me, and try to be satisfied with being the superhero of the day."Everyone else laughed now, and I ducked my face into Nessie's hair, embarrassed.　　Edward went back to analyzing every shift of intention and control that had happened in the meadowtoday, declaring that it was my shield that had made the Volturi run away with their tails between theirlegs. The way everyone looked at me made me uncomfortable. Even Edward. It was like I had grown ahundred feet during the course of the morning. I tried to ignore the impressed looks, mostly keeping myeyes on Nessie's sleeping face and Jacob's unchanged expression. I would always be just Bella to him,and that was a relief.　　The hardest stare to ignore was also the most confusing one.　　It wasn't like this half-human, half-vampire Nahuel was used to thinking of me in a certain way. For all heknew, I went around routing attacking vampires every day and the scene in the meadow had beennothing unusual at all. But the boy never took his eyes off me. Or maybe he was looking at Nessie. Thatmade me uncomfortable, too.　　He couldn't be oblivious to the fact that Nessie was the only female of his kind that wasn't his half-sister.　　I didn't think this idea had occurred to Jacob yet. I kind of hoped it wouldn't soon. I'd had enoughfighting to last me for a while.　　Eventually, the others ran out of questions for Edward, and the discussion dissolved into a bunch ofsmaller conversations.　　I felt oddly tired. Not sleepy, of course, but just like the day had been long enough. I wanted somepeace, some normality. I wanted Nessie in her own bed; I wanted the walls of my own little home aroundme.　　I looked at Edward and felt for a moment like I could read his mind. I could see he felt exactly the sameway. Ready for some peace.　　"Should we take Nessie ..."'That's probably a good idea," he agreed quickly. "I'm sure she didn't sleep soundly last night, what withall the snoring."He grinned at Jacob.　　Jacob rolled his eyes and then yawned. "It's been a while since I slept in a bed. I bet my dad would get akick out of having me under his roof again."I touched his cheek. "Thank you, Jacob.""Anytime, Bella. But you already know that."He got up, stretched, kissed the top of Nessie's head, and then the top of mine. Finally, he punchedEdward's shoulder. "See you guys tomorrow. I guess things are going to be kind of boring now, aren'tthey?""I fervently hope so," Edward said.　　We got up when he was gone; I shifted my weight carefully so that Nessie was never jostled. I wasdeeplygrateful to see her getting a sound sleep. So much weight had been on her tiny shoulders. It was time shegot to be a child again—protected and secure. A few more years of childhood.　　The idea of peace and security reminded me of someone who didn't have those feelings all the time.　　"Oh, Jasper?" I asked as we turned for the door.　　Jasper was sandwiched tight in between Alice and Esme, somehow seeming more central to the familypicture than usual. "Yes, Bella?"Tm curious—why is J. Jenks scared stiff by just the sound of your name?"Jasper chuckled."It's just been my experience that some kinds of working relationships are bettermotivated by fear than by monetary gain."I frowned, promising myself that I would take over that working relationship from now on and spare Jthe heart attack that was surely on the way.　　We were kissed and hugged and wished a good night to our family. The only off note was Nahuel again,who looked intently after us, as if he wished he could follow.　　Once we were across the river, we walked barely faster than human speed, in no hurry, holding hands. Iwas sick of being under a deadline, and I just wanted to take my time. Edward must have felt the same.　　"I have to say, I'm thoroughly impressed with Jacob right now," Edward told me.　　"Thewolves make quite an impact, don't they?""That's not what I mean. Not once today did he think about the fact that, according to Nahuel,Nessiewill befully matured in just six and a half years."I considered that for a minute. "He doesn't see her that way. He's not in a hurry for her to grow up.Hejust wants her to be happy.""I know. Like I said, impressive. It goes against the grain to say so, but she could do worse."I frowned. "I'm not going to think about that for approximately six and a half more years."Edward laughed and then sighed. "Of course, itlooks like he'll have some competition to worry aboutwhen the time comes."My frown deepened. "I noticed. I'm grateful to Nahuel for today, but all the staring was a little weird. Idon't care if she is the only half-vampire he's not related to.""Oh, he wasn't staring at her—he was staring at you."That's what it had seemed like... but that didn't make any sense. "Why would he do that?""Because you're alive," he said quietly.　　"You lost me.""All his life," he explained,"—and he's fifty years older than I am—""Decrepit," I interjected.　　Heignored me. "He's always thought of himself as an evil creation, a murderer by nature. His sistersallkilled their mothers as well, but they thought nothing of it. Joham raised them to think of the humans asanimals, while theywere gods. But Nahuel was taught by Huilen, and Huilen loved her sister more than anyone else. Itshaped his whole perspective. And, in some ways, he truly hated himself.""That'sso sad,"I murmured.　　"And then he saw the three of us—and realized for the first time that just because he ishalf immortal, itdoesn't mean he is inherently evil. He looks at me and sees... what his father should have been.""You are fairly ideal in every way," I agreed.　　He snorted and then was serious again. "He looks at you and sees the life his mother should have had.""Poor Nahuel," Imurmured, and then sighed because I knew I would never be able to think badly of himafter this, no matter how uncomfortable his stare made me.　　"Don't be sad for him. He's happy now. Today, he's finally begun to forgive himself."I smiled for Nahuel's happiness and then thought that today belonged to happiness. Though Irina'ssacrifice wasa dark shadow against the white light, keeping the moment from perfection, the joy wasimpossible to deny. The life I'd fought for was safe again. My family was reunited. My daughter had abeautiful future stretching out endlessly in front of her. Tomorrow I would go see my father; he would seethat the fear in my eyes had been replaced with joy, and he would be happy, too. Suddenly, I was surethat I wouldn't find him there alone. I hadn't been as observant as I might have been in the last fewweeks, but in this moment it was like I'd known all along. Sue would be with Charlie—thewerewolves'　　mom with the vampire's dad—and he wouldn't be alone anymore. I smiled widely at this new insight.　　But most significant in this tidal wave of happiness was the surest fact ofall: I was with Edward.　　Forever.　　Not that I'd want to repeat the last several weeks, but I had to admit they'd made me appreciate what Ihad more than ever.　　The cottage was a place of perfect peace in the silver-blue night. We carried Nessie to her bed andgently tucked her in. She smiled as she slept.　　I took Aro's gift from around my neck and tossed it lightly into the corner of her room. She could playwith it if she wished; she liked sparkly things.　　Edward and I walked slowly to our room, swinging our arms between us.　　"A night for celebrations," he murmured, and he put his hand under my chin to lift my lips to his.　　"Wait," I hesitated, pulling away.　　He looked at me in confusion. As a general rule, I didn't pull away. Okay, it was more than a generalrule. This was a first.　　"I want to try something," I informed him, smiling slightly at his bewildered expression.　　I put my hands on both sides of his face and closed my eyes in concentration.　　I hadn't done very well with this when Zafrina had tried to teach me before, but I knew my shield betternow. I understood the part that fought against separation from me, the automatic instinct to preserve selfaboveall else.　　Itstill wasn't anywhere near as easy as shielding other people along with myself. I felt the elastic recoilagain asmy shield fought to protect me. I had to strain to push it entirely away from me; it took all of my focus.　　"Bella!" Edward whispered in shock.　　I knew it was working then, so I concentrated even harder, dredging up the specific memories I'd savedfor this moment, letting them flood my mind, and hopefully his as well.　　Some of the memories were not clear—dim human memories, seen through weak eyes and heardthrough weak ears: the first time I'd seen his face... the way it felt when he'd held me in the meadow... thesound of his voice through the darkness of my faltering consciousness when he'd saved me from James...　　his face as he waited under a canopy of flowers to marry me... every precious moment from the island...　　his cold hands touching our baby through my skin...　　And the sharp memories, perfectly recalled: his face when I'd opened my eyes to my new life, to theendless dawn of immortality... that first kiss... that first night...　　His lips, suddenly fierce against mine, broke my concentration.　　With a gasp, I lost my grip on the struggling weight I was holding away from myself. It snapped backlike stressed elastic, protecting my thoughts once again.　　"Oops, lost it!" I sighed.　　"I heard you," he breathed. "How? How did you do that?""Zafrina's idea. We practiced with it a few times."He was dazed. He blinked twice and shook his head.　　"Now you know," I said lightly, and shrugged. "No one's ever loved anyone as much as I love you.""You're almost right." He smiled, his eyes still a little wider than usual. "I know of just one exception.""Liar."He started to kiss me again, but then stopped abruptly.　　"Can you do it again?" he wondered.　　I grimaced. "It's very difficult."He waited, his expression eager.　　"I can't keep it up if I'm even the slightest bit distracted," I warned him.　　"I'll be good," he promised.　　I pursed my lips, my eyes narrowing. Then I smiled.　　I pressed my hands to his face again, hefted the shield right out of my mind, and then started in where I'dleft off—with the crystal-clear memory of the first night of my new life... lingering on the details.　　I laughed breathlessly when his urgent kiss interrupted my efforts again.　　"Damn it," he growled, kissing hungrily down the edge of my jaw.　　"We have plenty of time to work on it," I reminded him.　　"Forever and forever and forever," he murmured.　　"That sounds exactly right to me."And then we continued blissfully into this small but perfect piece of our forever.　　the endVAMPIRE INDEXAlphabeticallyby coven* vampire possesses a quantifiable supernatural talent— bonded pair (oldest listed first)struckdeceased before beginning of this novelThe Amazon CovenKachiri SennaZafrina*The Denali CovenEleazar*— CarmenKate*Tanya VasHWThe Egyptian CovenAmun— KebiBenjamin*— TiaThe Irish CovenMaggie* Siobhan*— LiamThe Olympic CovenCarlisle— Esme Edward* — Bella* Jasper* — Alice* Renesmee* Rosalie — EmmettThe Romanian CovenStefanVladimirThe Volturi CovenAro*— Sulpicia Caius — Athenodora Marcus* —Didym e*The Volturi Guard (partial)Alec*Chelsea*— Afton*Corin*Demetri*FelixHeidi*Jane*Renata*SantiagoThe American Nomads (Partial)MaryPeter—CharlotteRandallThe European Nomads (Partial)Alistair*Charles*— MakennaAcknowledgmentsAs always, an ocean of thanks to;My awesome family, for all their incomparable love and support.　　My talented and hawt publicist, Elizabeth Eulberg, for creating STEPHENIE MEYER out of the rawclay that wasonce just a mousy Steph.　　The whole team at Little, Brown Books for Young Readers for five years of enthusiasm, faith, support,and incrediblyhard work.　　All the amazing site creators and administrators in the Twilight Saga online fandom; you people astoundme with yourcoolness.　　My brilliant, beautiful fans, with your unparalleled good taste in books, music, and movies, for continuingto love memore than I deserve.　　The bookstores who have made this series a hit with their recommendations; all authors are indebted toyou for yourlove of and passion for literature.　　The many bands and musicians that keep me motivated; did I mention Muse already? I did? Too bad.　　Muse, Muse, Muse...　　New gratitude to:　　The best band-that-never-was: Nic and the Jens, featuring Shelly C. (Nicole Driggs, Jennifer Hancock,Jennifer Longman, and Shelly Colvin). Thanks for taking me under your collective wing, guys. I would bea shut-in without you.　　My long-distance pals and fonts of sanity, Cool Meghan Hibbett and Kimberly "Shazzer" Suchy.　　My peer support, Shannon Hale, for understanding everything, and for feeding my love of zombiehumor.　　Makenna Jewell Lewis for the use of her name, and her mother, Heather, for her support of the ArizonaBallet.　　The new guys on my "writing inspiration" playlist: Interpol, Motion City Soundtrack, and Spoon.　　The phenomenon continues. . . . STEPHENIE MEYERthe twilight saga:　　the official guideYou may think you already know everything there is to know about the unforgettable world StephenieMeyer created in Twilight, New Moon, Eclipse, and Breaking Dawn, but this essential edition—theonly official guide—will put your knowledge to the test! With character profiles, genealogical charts,maps, extensive cross-references, and much more, this comprehensive handbook isa must-have forevery Twilight Saga fan.　　COMING DECEMBER 30, 2008
